AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: During hyperglycaemia, some glucose bypasses glycolysis and is 
metabolised via the potentially neurotoxic polyol pathway, in which glucose is 
metabolised to sorbitol and fructose. Increased polyol concentrations have been 
demonstrated in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of neurological patients with and 
without diabetes mellitus. However, polyol levels in patients without evident 
neurological abnormalities have not been investigated so far. The aim of this 
study was to determine CSF polyol concentrations in patients without major 
neurological disease with normal or elevated CSF glucose concentrations.
METHODS: This observational cohort study used CSF and plasma analyses, as well 
as clinical data, from 30 participants of the Anaesthetic Biobank of 
Cerebrospinal Fluid study. Biomaterial was collected from adult patients 
scheduled for elective surgery under spinal anaesthesia. CSF polyol 
concentrations were measured by GC/flame ionisation detector in ten patients 
with normal CSF glucose levels (group 1), ten patients with elevated CSF glucose 
levels (group 2) and ten patients with elevated CSF glucose levels and type 2 
diabetes (group 3). We compared the concentrations of plasma glucose, CSF 
glucose, sorbitol and fructose, and CSF polyol/glucose ratios between the three 
groups, and determined the correlation between plasma glucose levels and CSF 
glucose, sorbitol and fructose levels.
RESULTS: Groups 2 and 3 had significantly higher CSF fructose levels compared 
with group 1 (p=0.036 and p<0.001, respectively). Group 3 showed significant 
differences compared with groups 1 and 2 for CSF sorbitol (p<0.001 and 0.036, 
respectively). Moreover, patients with diabetes had a significantly higher CSF 
sorbitol/glucose ratio compared with patients without diabetes. There was a 
strong positive correlation between plasma glucose and CSF glucose, sorbitol and 
fructose. Finally, age, sex, CSF/plasma albumin ratio and preoperative cognitive 
function scores were significantly correlated with plasma glucose and CSF 
glucose, sorbitol and fructose levels.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Hyperglycaemia causes a proportional increase in 
polyol concentrations in CSF of patients without major neurological disease. 
Furthermore, this study provides the first indication of upregulation of the 
cerebral polyol pathway in patients with diabetes without evident neurological 
abnormalities.