Current treatment for celiac disease (CD) is adhering to a gluten-free diet 
(GFD), although its long-term molecular effects are still undescribed. New 
molecular features detectable in stool may improve and facilitate noninvasive 
clinical management of CD. For this purpose, fecal small non-coding RNAs 
(sncRNAs) and gut microbiome profiles were concomitantly explored in CD subjects 
in relation to strict (or not) GFD adherence over time. In this observational 
study, we performed small RNA and shotgun metagenomic sequencing in stool from 
63 treated CD (tCD) and 3 untreated subjects as well as 66 sex- and age-matched 
healthy controls. tCD included 51 individuals on strict GFD and with negative 
transglutaminase (TG) serology (tCD-TG-) and 12 symptomatic with not 
strict/short-time of GFD adherence and positive TG serology (tCD-TG+). Samples 
from additional 40 healthy adult individuals and a cohort of 19 untreated 
pediatric CD subjects and 19 sex/age matched controls were analyzed to further 
test the outcomes. Several miRNA and microbial profiles were altered in tCD 
subjects (adj. p < .05). Findings were validated in the external group of adult 
controls. In tCD-TG-, GFD duration correlated with five miRNA levels (p < .05): 
for miR-4533-3p and miR-2681-3p, the longer the diet adherence, the less the 
expression differed from controls. tCD-TG+ and untreated pediatric CD patients 
showed a similar miRNA dysregulation. Immune-response, trans-membrane transport 
and cell death pathways were enriched in targets of identified miRNAs. 
Bifidobacterium longum, Ruminococcus bicirculans, and Haemophilus parainfluenzae 
abundances shifted (adj. p < .05) with a progressive reduction of 
denitrification pathways with GFD length. Integrative analysis highlighted 121 
miRNA-bacterial relationships (adj. p < .05). Specific molecular patterns in 
stool characterize CD subjects, reflecting either the long-term GFD effects or 
the gut inflammatory status, in case of a not strict/short-time adherence. Our 
findings suggest novel host-microbial interplays and could help the discovery of 
biomarkers for GFD monitoring over time.