Predicting disability in progressive multiple sclerosis (MS) is extremely 
challenging. Although there is some evidence that the spatial distribution of 
white matter (WM) lesions may play a role in disability accumulation, the lack 
of well-established quantitative metrics that characterise these aspects of MS 
pathology makes it difficult to assess their relevance for clinical progression. 
This study introduces a novel approach, called SPACE-MS, to quantitatively 
characterise spatial distributional features of brain MS lesions, so that these 
can be assessed as predictors of disability accumulation. In SPACE-MS, the 
covariance matrix of the spatial positions of each patient's lesional voxels is 
computed and its eigenvalues extracted. These are combined to derive 
rotationally-invariant metrics known to be common and robust descriptors of 
ellipsoid shape such as anisotropy, planarity and sphericity. Additionally, 
SPACE-MS metrics include a neuraxis caudality index, which we defined for the 
whole-brain lesion mask as well as for the most caudal brain lesion. These 
indicate how distant from the supplementary motor cortex (along the neuraxis) 
the whole-brain mask or the most caudal brain lesions are. We applied SPACE-MS 
to data from 515 patients involved in three studies: the MS-SMART (NCT01910259) 
and MS-STAT1 (NCT00647348) secondary progressive MS trials, and an observational 
study of primary and secondary progressive MS. Patients were assessed on motor 
and cognitive disability scales and underwent structural brain MRI (1.5/3.0 T), 
at baseline and after 2 years. The MRI protocol included 3DT1-weighted 
(1x1x1mm3) and 2DT2-weighted (1x1x3mm3) anatomical imaging. WM lesions were 
semiautomatically segmented on the T2-weighted scans, deriving whole-brain 
lesion masks. After co-registering the masks to the T1 images, SPACE-MS metrics 
were calculated and analysed through a series of multiple linear regression 
models, which were built to assess the ability of spatial distributional metrics 
to explain concurrent and future disability after adjusting for confounders. 
Patients whose WM lesions laid more caudally along the neuraxis or were more 
isotropically distributed in the brain (i.e. with whole-brain lesion masks 
displaying a high sphericity index) at baseline had greater motor and/or 
cognitive disability at baseline and over time, independently of brain lesion 
load and atrophy measures. In conclusion, here we introduced the SPACE-MS 
approach, which we showed is able to capture clinically relevant spatial 
distributional features of MS lesions independently of the sheer amount of 
lesions and brain tissue loss. Location of lesions in lower parts of the brain, 
where neurite density is particularly high, such as in the cerebellum and 
brainstem, and greater spatial spreading of lesions (i.e. more isotropic 
whole-brain lesion masks), possibly reflecting a higher number of WM tracts 
involved, are associated with clinical deterioration in progressive MS. The 
usefulness of the SPACE-MS approach, here demonstrated in MS, may be explored in 
other conditions also characterised by the presence of brain WM lesions.