BACKGROUND: Microbiome dysbiosis can have long-lasting effects on our health and 
induce the development of various diseases. Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) is 
a multifactorial disease with pre- and postnatal origins including 
intra-amniotic infection as main risk factor. Recently, postnatal pathologic 
lung microbiota colonization was associated with BPD. The objectives of this 
prospective observational cohort study were to describe differences in bacterial 
signatures in the amniotic fluid (AF) of intact pregnancies without clinical 
signs or risk of preterm delivery and AF samples obtained during preterm 
deliveries and their variations between different BPD disease severity stages.
METHODS: AF samples were collected under sterile conditions during fetal 
intervention from intact pregnancies (n = 17) or immediately before preterm 
delivery < 32 weeks (n = 126). Metabarcoding based approaches were used for the 
molecular assessment of bacterial 16S rRNA genes to describe bacterial community 
structure.
RESULTS: The absolute amount of 16S rRNA genes was significantly increased in AF 
of preterm deliveries and detailed profiling revealed a reduced alpha diversity 
and a significant change in beta diversity with a reduced relative abundance of 
16S rRNA genes indicative for Lactobacillus and Acetobacter while Fusobacterium, 
Pseudomonas, Ureaplasma and Staphylococcus 16S rRNA gene prevailed. Although 
classification of BPD by disease severity revealed equivalent absolute 16S rRNA 
gene abundance and alpha and beta diversity in no, mild and moderate/severe BPD 
groups, for some 16S rRNA genes differences were observed in AF samples. 
Bacterial signatures of infants with moderate/severe BPD showed predominance of 
16S rRNA genes belonging to the Escherichia-Shigella cluster while Ureaplasma 
and Enterococcus species were enriched in AF samples of infants with mild BPD.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study identified distinct and diverse intrauterine 16S rRNA 
gene patterns in preterm infants immediately before birth, differing from the 
16S rRNA gene signature of intact pregnancies. The distinct 16S rRNA gene 
signatures at birth derive from bacteria with varying pathogenicity to the 
immature lung and are suited to identify preterm infants at risk. Our results 
emphasize the prenatal impact to the origins of BPD.