1/BACKGROUND: Rotational thromboelastometry (ROTEM) is a blood test used to measure in vitro clot strength as a surrogate for a patient's ability to form clots in vivo. This provides information about induction, formation, and clot lysis, allowing goal-directed transfusion therapy for specific hemostatic needs. We sought to evaluate the effect of ROTEM-guided transfusion on blood product usage and in-hospital mortality among patients with a traumatic injury. 
2/METHODS: This was a single-center observational cohort analysis of emergency department patients in a Level 1 trauma center. We compared blood usage in trauma patients in whom ratio-based massive hemorrhage protocols were activated in the twelve months before the introduction of ROTEM (pre-ROTEM group) to the twelve months following the introduction of ROTEM (ROTEM-period group). ROTEM was implemented in this center in November 2016. The ROTEM device allowed clinicians to make real-time decisions about blood product therapy in resuscitation for trauma. 
3/RESULTS: The pre-ROTEM group contained 21 patients. Forty-three patients were included from the ROTEM-period, of whom 35 patients received ROTEM-guided resuscitation (81% compliance). The use of fibrinogen concentrate was significantly higher in the ROTEM-period group (pre-ROTEM mean 0.2 vs. ROTEM-period mean 0.8; p = 0.006). There was no significant difference in the number of units of red blood cells, platelets, cryoprecipitate, or fresh frozen plasma transfused between these groups. There was no significant difference in the mortality rate between the pre-ROTEM and ROTEM-period groups (33% vs. 19%; p = 0.22). 
4/CONCLUSIONS: The introduction of ROTEM-guided transfusion at this institution was associated with increased fibrinogen usage, but this did not impact mortality rates. There was no difference in the administration of red blood cell, fresh frozen plasma, platelet, and cryoprecipitate. Future research should focus on increased ROTEM compliance and optimizing ROTEM-guided transfusion to prevent blood product overuse among trauma patients. 