Botulinum Toxin A has been the main treatment for spasticity since the beginning 
of the 1990s. Surprisingly, there is still no consensus regarding injection 
parameters or, importantly, how to determine which muscles to target to improve 
specific functions. The aim of this study was to develop a systematic approach 
to determine this, using the example of the arm flexion pattern. We first 
determined anatomical landmarks for selective motor block of the brachialis 
nerve, using 20 forearms from 10 fresh cadavers in Ecole Européenne de Chirurgie 
and a university-based dissection centre, Paris, France. We then carried out 
selective blocks of the motor nerves to the brachialis, brachioradialis and 
biceps brachii in patients with stroke with an arm flexion pattern, in a 
University Rehabilitation Hospital, Garches, France. We measured: the resting 
angle of the elbow angle in standing (manual goniometer), active and passive 
range of extension, and spasticity using the Held and Tardieu and the Modified 
Ashworth scales. Range of passive elbow extension was also measured with the 
shoulder in 90° of flexion. The resting angle of the elbow in standing decreased 
by 35.0° (from 87.6 ± 23.7 to 52.6 ± 24.2°) with inhibition of brachialis, by a 
further 3.9° (from 52.6 ± 24.2 to 48.7 ± 23.7°) with inhibition of 
brachioradialis and a further 14.5° (from 48.7 ± 23.7to 34.2 ± 20.7°) with 
inhibition of biceps brachii. These results were consistent with the clinical 
evaluation of passive elbow range of motion with the shoulder at 90°. Sequential 
blocking of the nerves to the three main elbow flexors revealed that the muscle 
that limited elbow extension the most, was brachialis. This muscle should be the 
main target to improve the arm flexion pattern. These results show that it is 
important not simply to inject the most superficial or powerful muscles to treat 
a spastic deformity. A comprehensive assessment is required. The strategy 
proposed in this paper should increase the effectiveness of botulinum toxin 
injections by ensuring that the relevant muscles are targeted.