BACKGROUND: The thalamus seems to be important in the development of 
postoperative delirium (POD) as previously revealed by volumetric and diffusion 
magnetic resonance imaging. In this observational cohort study, we aimed to 
further investigate the impact of the microstructural integrity of the thalamus 
and thalamic nuclei on the incidence of POD by applying diffusion kurtosis 
imaging (DKI).
METHODS: Older patients without dementia (≥65 years) who were scheduled for 
major elective surgery received preoperative DKI at two study centres. The DKI 
metrics fractional anisotropy (FA), mean diffusivity (MD), mean kurtosis (MK) 
and free water (FW) were calculated for the thalamus and - as secondary outcome 
- for eight predefined thalamic nuclei and regions. Low FA and MK and, 
conversely, high MD and FW, indicate aspects of microstructural abnormality. To 
assess patients' POD status, the Nursing Delirium Screening Scale (Nu-DESC), 
Richmond Agitation Sedation Scale (RASS), Confusion Assessment Method (CAM) and 
Confusion Assessment Method for the Intensive Care Unit score (CAM-ICU) and 
chart review were applied twice a day after surgery for the duration of seven 
days or until discharge. For each metric and each nucleus, logistic regression 
was performed to assess the risk of POD.
RESULTS: This analysis included the diffusion scans of 325 patients, of whom 53 
(16.3 %) developed POD. Independently of age, sex and study centre, thalamic MD 
was statistically significantly associated with POD [OR 1.65 per SD increment 
(95 %CI 1.17 - 2.34) p = 0.004]. FA (p = 0.84), MK (p = 0.41) and FW (p = 0.06) 
were not significantly associated with POD in the examined sample. Exploration 
of thalamic nuclei also indicated that only the MD in certain areas of the 
thalamus was associated with POD. MD was increased in bilateral hemispheres, 
pulvinar nuclei, mediodorsal nuclei and the left anterior nucleus.
CONCLUSIONS: Microstructural abnormalities of the thalamus and thalamic nuclei, 
as reflected by increased MD, appear to predispose to POD. These findings affirm 
the thalamus as a region of interest in POD research.