BACKGROUND: Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a common 
childhood behavioral condition that globally affects an average of around 5% of 
children and is associated with several adverse life outcomes. Comorbidity with 
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is highly prevalent. Pharmacological treatment 
for ADHD symptoms has been shown to be effective. However, the prevailing 
perception is that children with ADHD and concomitant ASD symptoms report poorer 
efficacy and more side effects. This has been supported by studies on this 
population, but prospective studies directly comparing children with ADHD and 
different levels of ASD symptoms are lacking. We aimed to assess if children 
with ADHD and concomitant ASD symptoms differ regarding effects and side-effects 
of pharmacological ADHD treatment compared to children with ADHD without ASD 
traits. This is to our knowledge the second study to directly compare the effect 
of ADHD medication between ADHD patients with different levels of ASD symptoms.
METHODS: In a non-randomized, observational, prospective cohort study, 323 
patients aged 6 to 17 years who were diagnosed with ADHD and starting 
pharmacological treatment were divided into two groups: one with high level of 
ASD symptoms (ASD group, N=71) and one with low level of ASD symptoms (non-ASD 
group, N = 252). Treatment outcome was measured as ADHD symptoms, and evaluated 
using the Swanson, Nolan and Pelham Teacher and Parent ADHD rating scale-version 
IV (SNAP-IV). Side-effects were evaluated using the Pediatric Side Effects 
Checklist (P-SEC), at 3 months follow-up.
RESULTS: From baseline to 3 months, there was no significant difference in 
neither treatment effect nor number of clinically significant adverse events 
experienced between the ASD group and the non-ASD group.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results did not implicate that ADHD patients with concomitant 
ASD symptoms have decreased treatment effect of ADHD medication than patients 
with ADHD without concomitant ASD symptoms. Neither did the results support that 
ADHD patients with ASD symptoms experienced significantly more side-effects than 
ADHD patients without ASD symptoms. Although, we did not analyze different 
medications separately, this is in line with the only previous study directly 
comparing methylphenidate treatment in children with or without ASD.