BACKGROUND: Providing effective, high quality, antenatal and postpartum 
contraceptive counseling can reduce unintended pregnancies, decrease maternal 
and fetal morbidity and mortality, and prevent unsafe abortions. The postpartum 
period is a critical time to address unmet family planning need and to reduce 
the risks of short interpregnancy interval. This study aimed at determining the 
impact of assigning a dedicated obstetrics and gynecology resident for 
postpartum family planning counselling on the uptake of immediate postpartum 
family planning.
METHODS: A "pre-post" observational study was conducted at Saint Paul's Hospital 
Millennium Medical College (SPHMMC), in Addis Ababa-Ethiopia, from May 1, 2021 
to June 30, 2021. Immediate postpartum family planning uptake between the months 
of June (when there was a dedicated resident assigned for postpartum family 
planning counselling and provison on weekdays) and May (when there was no such 
dedicated resident for similar purpose) were compared. Data was analyzed using 
SPSS version 20 software packages. Simple descriptive was used to describe 
baseline characteristics. Chi-square test of association was done to determine 
the correlation between dependent and independent variables. Multivariate 
regression analysis was applied to determine factors associated with uptake of 
family planning methods in the immediate postpartum period. Odds ratio, 95% CI, 
and p-value < 0.05 were used to describe results significance.
RESULTS: Out of 776 mothers who delivered at SPHMMC in the month of June 2021, 
158 (20.4%) of them used immediate postpartum family planning. This finding 
during the month of June is higher than a 15.4% immediate postpartum family 
planning uptake observed during the preceding month of May. Having a dedicated 
resident for postpartum family planning counselling was associated with an 
increase in immediate postpartum family planning use (AOR = 1.31, 95% CI [1.01, 
1.69]).
CONCLUSION: In this study, presence of a dedicated obstetrics and gynecology 
resident for postpartum family planning counselling was associated with an 
increase in the uptake of immediate postpartum family planning. This implies the 
importance of assigning a dedicated care provider for the purpose of postpartum 
family planning counselling within the immediate postpartum, which gives 
postpartum women another opportunity of adequate counselling before they are 
discharge from Hospitals or obstetric service centers.