INTRODUCTION: In sub-Saharan Africa, there is limited evidence on the COVID-19 
health-related effect from front-line health provision settings. Therefore, this 
study aimed to analyse the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on routine maternal 
and neonatal health services in three referral hospitals.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We conducted an observational study using aggregate 
monthly maternal and neonatal health services routine data for two years (March 
2019-February 2021) in three referral hospitals including two maternities: 
Hôpital National Ignace Deen (HNID) in Conakry and Hôpital Regional de Mamou 
(HRM) in Mamou and one neonatology ward: Institut de Nutrition et de Santé de 
l'Enfant (INSE) in Conakry. We compared indicators of health service 
utilisation, provision and health outcomes before and during the COVID-19 
pandemic periods. An interrupted time-series analysis (ITSA) was performed to 
assess the relationship between changes in maternal and neonatal health 
indicators and COVID-19 through cross-correlation.
RESULTS: During COVID-19, the mean monthly number (MMN) of deliveries decreased 
significantly in HNID (p = 0.039) and slightly increased in HRM. In the two 
maternities, the change in the MMN of deliveries were significantly associated 
with COVID-19. The ITSA confirmed the association between the increase in the 
MMN of deliveries and COVID-19 in HRM (bootstrapped F-value = 1.46, 95%CI 
[0.036-8.047], p < 0.01). We observed an increasing trend in obstetric 
complications in HNID, while the trend declined in HRM. The MMN of maternal 
deaths increased significantly (p = 0.011) in HNID, while it slightly increased 
in HRM. In INSE, the MMN of neonatal admissions significantly declined 
(p < 0.001) and this decline was associated with COVID-19. The MMN of neonatal 
deaths significantly decreased (p = 0.009) in INSE and this decrease was related 
to COVID-19.
CONCLUSION: The pandemic negatively affected the maternal and neonatal care 
provision, health service utilisation and health outcomes in two referral 
hospitals located in Conakry, the COVID-19 most-affected region.