1/BACKGROUND: Current literature describing the periacetabular osteotomy (PAO) is   mostly limited to retrospective case series. Larger, prospective cohort studies   are needed to provide better clinical evidence regarding this procedure. The   goals of the current study were to (1) report minimum 2-year patient-reported   outcomes (pain, hip function, activity, overall health, and quality of life),   (2) investigate preoperative clinical and disease characteristics as predictors   of clinical outcomes, and (3) report the rate of early failures and reoperations   in patients undergoing contemporary PAO surgery.  
2/METHODS: A large, prospective, multicenter cohort of PAO procedures was   established, and outcomes at a minimum of 2 years were analyzed. A total of 391   hips were included for analysis (79% of the patients were female, and the   average patient age was 25.4 years). Patient-reported outcomes, conversion to   total hip replacement, reoperations, and major complications were documented.   Variables with a p value of ≤0.10 in the univariate linear regressions were   included in the multivariate linear regression. The backward stepwise selection   method was used to determine the final risk factors of clinical outcomes.  
3/RESULTS: Clinical outcome analysis demonstrated major clinically important   improvements in pain, function, quality of life, overall health, and activity   level. Increasing age and a body mass index status of overweight or obese were   predictive of improved results for certain outcome metrics. Male sex and mild   acetabular dysplasia were predictive of lesser improvements in certain outcome   measures. Three (0.8%) of the hips underwent early conversion to total hip   arthroplasty, 12 (3%) required reoperation, and 26 (7%) experienced a major   complication.  
4/CONCLUSIONS: This large, prospective cohort study demonstrated the clinical   success of contemporary PAO surgery for the treatment of symptomatic acetabular   dysplasia. Patient and disease characteristics demonstrated predictive value   that should be considered in surgical decision-making.  LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Therapeutic Level IV. See Instructions for Authors for a   complete description of levels of evidence.    