Liver transplantation is a life-saving option for decompensated cirrhosis. Liver 
transplant recipients require advanced self-management skills, intact cognitive 
skills, and care partner support to improve long-term outcomes. Gaps remain in 
understanding post-liver transplant cognitive and health trajectories, and 
patient factors such as self-management skills, care partner support, and sleep. 
Our aims are to (1) assess pre-liver transplant to post-liver transplant 
cognitive trajectories and identify risk factors for persistent cognitive 
impairment; (2) evaluate associations between cognitive function and 
self-management skills, health behaviors, functional health status, and 
post-transplant outcomes; and (3) investigate potential mediators and moderators 
of associations between cognitive function and post-liver transplant outcomes. 
LivCog is a longitudinal, prospective observational study that will enroll 450 
adult liver transplant recipients and their caregivers/care partners. The 
duration of the study is 5 years with 24 additional months of patient follow-up. 
Data will be collected from participants at 1, 3, 12, and 24 months 
post-transplant. Limited pre-liver transplant data will also be collected from 
waitlisted candidates. Data collection methods include interviews, surveys, 
cognitive assessments, and actigraphy/sleep diary measures. Patient measurements 
include sociodemographic characteristics, pretransplant health status, cognitive 
function, physical function, perioperative measures, medical history, transplant 
history, self-management skills, patient-reported outcomes, health behaviors, 
and clinical outcomes. Caregiver measures assess sociodemographic variables, 
health literacy, health care navigation skills, self-efficacy, care partner 
preparedness, nature and intensity of care, care partner burden, and community 
participation. By elucidating various health trajectories from pre-liver 
transplant to 2 years post-liver transplant, LivCog will be able to better 
characterize recipients at higher risk of cognitive impairment and compromised 
self-management. Findings will inform interventions targeting health behaviors, 
self-management, and caregiver supports to optimize outcomes.