BACKGROUND: The liver is a frequent site of metastases and liver metastases (LM) 
correlate with diminished immunotherapy efficacy in non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC). This study aimed to analyze whether tumor response to immunotherapy 
differs between pulmonary lesions (PL) and LM in NSCLC and to explore potential 
mechanisms through multiomics analysis.
METHODS: This observational longitudinal clinical cohort study included patients 
with NSCLC with LM receiving immunotherapy was conducted to evaluate 
organ-specific tumor response of PL and LM. We collected paired PL and LM tumor 
samples to analyze the organ-specific difference using whole-exome sequencing, 
RNA sequencing, and multiplex immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: A total of 52 patients with NSCLC with LM were enrolled to evaluate the 
organ-specific response of immunotherapy. The objective response rate (21.1% vs 
32.7%) and disease control rate of LM were lower than that of PL (67.3% vs 
86.5%). One-third of patients showed mixed response, among whom 88.2% (15/17) 
presented with LM increasing, but PL decreasing, while the others had the 
opposite pattern (p=0.002). In another independent cohort, 27 pairs of matched 
PL and LM tumor samples from the same individuals, including six simultaneously 
collected pairs, were included in the translational part. Genomic landscapes 
profiling revealed similar somatic mutations, tumor mutational burden, and 
neoantigen number between PL and LM. Bulk-RNA sequencing showed immune 
activation-related genes including CD8A, LCK, and ICOS were downregulated in LM. 
The antigen processing and presentation, natural killer (NK) cell-mediated 
cytotoxicity and T-cell receptor signaling pathway were enriched in PL compared 
with LM. Multiplex immunohistochemistry detected significantly lower fractions 
of CD8+ cells (p=0.036) and CD56dim+ cells (p=0.016) in LM compared with PL. 
Single-cell RNA sequencing also characterized lower effector CD8+ T cells 
activation and NK cells cytotoxicity in LM.
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with PL, LM presents an inferior organ-specific tumor 
response to immunotherapy. PL and LM showed limited heterogeneity in the genomic 
landscape, while the LM tumor microenvironment displayed lower levels of immune 
activation and infiltration than PL, which might contribute to developing 
precise immunotherapy strategies for patients with NSCLC with LM.