BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: The capacity of specialty memory clinics in the 
United States is very limited. If lower socioeconomic status or minoritized 
racial group is associated with reduced use of memory clinics, this could 
exacerbate health care disparities, especially if more effective treatments of 
Alzheimer disease become available. We aimed to understand how use of a memory 
clinic is associated with neighborhood-level measures of socioeconomic factors 
and the intersectionality of race.
METHODS: We conducted an observational cross-sectional study using electronic 
health record data to compare the neighborhood advantage of patients seen at the 
Washington University Memory Diagnostic Center with the catchment area using a 
geographical information system. Furthermore, we compared the severity of 
dementia at the initial visit between patients who self-identified as Black or 
White. We used a multinomial logistic regression model to assess the Clinical 
Dementia Rating at the initial visit and t tests to compare neighborhood 
characteristics, including Area Deprivation Index, with those of the catchment 
area.
RESULTS: A total of 4,824 patients seen at the memory clinic between 2008 and 
2018 were included in this study (mean age 72.7 [SD 11.0] years, 2,712 [56%] 
female, 543 [11%] Black). Most of the memory clinic patients lived in more 
advantaged neighborhoods within the overall catchment area. The percentage of 
patients self-identifying as Black (11%) was lower than the average percentage 
of Black individuals by census tract in the catchment area (16%) (p < 0.001). 
Black patients lived in less advantaged neighborhoods, and Black patients were 
more likely than White patients to have moderate or severe dementia at their 
initial visit (odds ratio 1.59, 95% CI 1.11-2.25).
DISCUSSION: This study demonstrates that patients living in less affluent 
neighborhoods were less likely to be seen in one large memory clinic. Black 
patients were under-represented in the clinic, and Black patients had more 
severe dementia at their initial visit. These findings suggest that patients 
with a lower socioeconomic status and who identify as Black are less likely to 
be seen in memory clinics, which are likely to be a major point of access for 
any new Alzheimer disease treatments that may become available.