BACKGROUND: Patients with craniocervical pain have shown reduced performance in 
the craniocervical flexion test (CCFT). However, there is limited evidence of 
other possible kinematic alterations not assessed in the context of the CCFT. 
Previous studies on other functional or planar movements have reported 
alterations in sensorimotor control (e.g., range of motion [ROM], velocity, or 
smoothness) in subjects with neck pain. The objective of this study was to 
explore the association between sensorimotor control variables associated with 
craniocervical flexion movement and different characteristics related to pain, 
age, disability, and fear of movement in individuals with non-traumatic chronic 
neck pain and asymptomatic controls.
METHODS: This was an observational, cross-sectional study in patients with 
non-traumatic neck pain and asymptomatic participants. Regression models were 
used to assess whether descriptive characteristics of the sample, including: (a) 
age, (b) intensity of pain, (c) neck disability, (d) chronicity of pain, and (e) 
fear of movement could explain sensorimotor control variables such as ROM, 
velocity, jerk, head repositioning accuracy, and conjunct motion. All these 
variables were recorded by means of light inertial measurement unit sensors 
during the performance of three maximal repetitions of full range craniocervical 
flexion in the supine position.
RESULTS: A total of 211 individuals were screened and 192 participants finished 
the protocol and were included in the analyses. Participants had an average age 
of 34.55 ± 13.93 years and included 124 patients with non-traumatic neck pain 
and 68 asymptomatic subjects. Kinesiophobia partially explained lower 
craniocervical flexion ROM (p = .01) and lower peak velocity in flexion 
(P < .001). Age partially explained increased craniocervical extension ROM 
(P < .001) and lower peak velocity in flexion (P = .03). Chronicity partially 
explained increased lateral flexion conjunct motion (P = .008). All models 
showed low values of explained variance (< 32%) and low absolute values of 
regression coefficients.
CONCLUSIONS: This study did not find a clear relationship between population 
characteristics and sensorimotor control variables associated with the 
craniocervical flexion movement. Kinesiophobia might have some association with 
reduced ROM in craniocervical flexion, but further research in this field is 
needed in large samples of patients with higher levels of kinesiophobia pain or 
disability.