BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: MRI connectomics is an ideal tool to test a 
network-based model of pathologic propagation from a disease epicenter in 
neurodegenerative disorders. In this study, we used a novel graph theory-based 
MRI paradigm to explore functional connectivity reorganization, discerning 
between direct and indirect connections from disease epicenters, and its 
relationship with neurodegeneration across clinical presentations of the 
frontotemporal dementia (FTD) spectrum, including behavioral variant of FTD 
(bvFTD), nonfluent variant of primary progressive aphasia (nfvPPA), and semantic 
variant of primary progressive aphasia (svPPA).
METHODS: In this observational cross-sectional study, disease epicenters were 
defined as the peaks of atrophy of a cohort of patients with high confidence of 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration pathology (Mayo Clinic). These were used as 
seed regions for stepwise functional connectivity (SFC) analyses in an 
independent (Milan) set of patients with FTD to assess connectivity in regions 
directly and indirectly connected to the epicenters. Correlations between SFC 
architecture in healthy conditions and atrophy patterns in patients with FTD 
were also tested.
RESULTS: As defined by comparing the 42 Mayo Clinic patients with 15 controls, 
disease epicenters were the left anterior insula for bvFTD, left supplementary 
motor area for nfvPPA, and left inferior temporal gyrus (ITG) for svPPA. 
Compared with 94 age-matched controls, patients with bvFTD (n = 64) and nfvPPA 
(n = 34) of the Milan cohort showed widespread decreased SFC in bilateral 
cortical regions with direct/indirect connections with epicenters and increased 
SFC either in directly connected regions, physically close to the respective 
seed region, or in more distant cortical/cerebellar areas with indirect 
connections. Across all link steps, svPPA (n = 36) showed SFC decrease mostly 
within the temporal lobes, with co-occurrent SFC increase in cerebellar regions 
at indirect link steps. The average stepwise topological distance from the left 
ITG in a reference group of 50 young healthy controls correlated with regional 
gray matter volume in svPPA, consistent with network-based degeneration.
DISCUSSION: Our findings demonstrate that each FTD syndrome is associated with a 
characteristic interplay of decreased and increased functional connectivity with 
the disease epicenter, affecting both direct and indirect connections. SFC 
revealed novel insights regarding the topology of functional disconnection 
across FTD syndromes, holding the promise to be used to model disease 
progression in future longitudinal studies.