BACKGROUND: Fatigue is one of the most commonly reported symptoms after 
subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) and is indirectly associated with physical 
activity (PA). Associations between fatigue and PA are primarily examined based 
on conventional measures (i.e. a single fatigue score or average PA levels), 
thereby assuming that fatigue and PA do not fluctuate over time. However, levels 
of fatigue and PA may not be stable and may interrelate dynamically in daily 
life. Insight in direct relationships between fatigue and PA in daily life, 
could add to the development of personalized rehabilitation strategies. 
Therefore we aimed to examine bidirectional relationships between momentary 
fatigue and PA in people with SAH.
METHODS: People (n = 38) with SAH who suffer from chronic fatigue were included 
in an observational study using Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA) and 
accelerometry. Momentary fatigue was assessed on a scale from 1 to 7 (no to 
extreme fatigue), assessed with 10-11 prompts per day for 7 consecutive days 
using EMA with a mobile phone. PA was continuously measured during this 7-day 
period with a thigh-worn Activ8 accelerometer and expressed as total minutes of 
standing, walking, running and cycling in a period of 45 min before and after a 
momentary fatigue prompt. Multilevel mixed model analyses including random 
effects were conducted.
RESULTS: Mean age was 53.2 years (SD = 13.4), 58% female, and mean time post SAH 
onset was 9.5 months (SD = 2.1). Multilevel analyses with only time effects to 
predict fatigue and PA revealed that fatigue significantly (p < 0.001) increased 
over the day and PA significantly (p < 0.001) decreased. In addition, more PA 
was significantly associated with higher subsequent fatigue (β = 0.004, 
p < 0.05) and higher fatigue was significantly associated with less subsequent 
PA (β=-0.736, p < 0.05). Moreover, these associations significantly differed 
between participants (p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: By combining EMA measures of fatigue with accelerometer-based PA we 
found that fatigue and PA are bidirectionally associated. In addition, these 
associations differ among participants. Given these different bidirectional 
associations, rehabilitation aimed at reducing fatigue should comprise 
personalized strategies to improve both fatigue and PA simultaneously, for 
example by combining exercise therapy with cognitive behavioral and/or energy 
management therapy.