Context: Representativeness of 'standard' antihypertensive drug trials is 
uncertain, with limited recruitment of older people. Some trials specifically 
recruit older participants to address this. Trials are obliged to report 
hospitalizations and deaths, regardless of cause, as Serious Adverse Events 
(SAEs). If older-people's trials are representative, we would expect rates of 
SAEs in trials to be similar to the rate of hospitalisation and death in the 
community, and higher than standard trials. Objective: To compare the rate of 
SAEs in hypertension trials to rates of hospitalisation and death among people 
taking similar treatments in the community. Study Design: Observational study 
comparing trial populations to a community cohort. Dataset: We identified trials 
of Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone system (RAAS) drugs for hypertension from 
clinicatrials.gov. We identified a community comparison population of people 
with hypertension starting RAAS drugs using primary care data from the Wales, UK 
(SAIL databank). Population studied: Trial participants from 110 RAAS 
hypertension trials (11 older-people's trials, mean age 73, and 99 standard 
trials, mean age 56). Community cohort of people with hypertension (n=56,036, 
mean age 60) starting RAAS drugs. Outcomes: SAEs in trials (mostly accounted for 
by hospitalizations or deaths) and all-cause hospitalizations/deaths in the 
community comparison. SAE rates in older-people and standard trials were 
compared, adjusting for trial characteristics. The community rate was used to 
calculate the expected rate of hospitalizations/deaths given the age/sex 
distribution of each trial. We then compared the expected rate with the observed 
rate of SAEs in each trial. Results: Older-people's trials had higher SAEs rate 
than standard trials (0.18 versus 0.11 events/person/year, adjusted IRR 1.74, 
95% CI 1.03-2.92). The hospitalisation and death rate in the community for those 
taking RAAS antihypertensives was much greater than the rate of SAEs reported in 
standard (ratio 3.70 (3.12-4.55)) and older-people's trials (4.35 (2.56-7.69)), 
adjusting for age and sex. Conclusion: Trials report substantially fewer SAEs 
than expected from rates of hospitalisations and deaths among similar-aged 
people receiving equivalent treatments in the community. SAE rates may be a 
useful metric to assess trial representativeness. Clinicians should be cautious 
when applying trial recommendations to older people, even when trials focus on 
older people.