BACKGROUND: Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are widely used, 
environmentally ubiquitous, and stable chemicals that have been associated with 
lower vaccine-induced antibody responses in children; however, data on adults 
are limited. The drinking water from one of the two waterworks in Ronneby, 
Sweden, was heavily contaminated for decades with PFAS from firefighting foams, 
primarily perfluorohexane sulfonic acid and perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS). 
Vaccination against SARS-CoV-2 offered a unique opportunity to investigate 
antibody responses to primary vaccination in adults who had been exposed to 
PFAS.
OBJECTIVES: Our objective was to evaluate associations between PFAS, across a 
wide range of exposure levels, and antibody responses in adults 5 wk and 6 
months after a two-dose vaccination regime against SARS-CoV-2.
METHODS: Adults age 20-60 y from Ronneby (n = 309, median PFOS serum level 
47 ng/mL, fifth to 95th percentile 4 - 213 ng/mL) and a group with background 
exposure (n = 47, median PFOS serum level 4 ng/mL) received two doses of the 
Spikevax (Moderna) mRNA vaccine. The levels of seven PFAS were measured in serum 
before vaccination. Serum immunoglobulin G antibodies against the SARS-CoV-2 
spike antigen (S-Abs) were measured before vaccination and at 5 wk (n = 350) and 
6 months (n = 329) after the second vaccine dose. Linear regression analyses 
were fitted against current, historical, and prenatal exposure to PFAS, 
adjusting for sex, age, and smoking, excluding individuals with previous 
SARS-CoV-2-infection.
RESULTS: PFAS exposure, regardless of how it was estimated, was not negatively 
associated with antibody levels 5 wk [current PFOS: - 0.5% S-Abs/PFOS 
interquartile range (IQR); 95% confidence interval (CI): - 8, 7] or 6 months 
(current PFOS: 3% S-Abs/PFOS IQR; 95% CI: - 6, 12) after COVID-19 vaccination.
DISCUSSION: Following a strict study protocol, rigorous study design, and few 
dropouts, we found no indication that PFAS exposure negatively affected antibody 
responses to COVID-19 mRNA vaccination for up to 6 months after vaccination.