Herpes zoster (HZ) is caused by reactivation of the latent varicella zoster virus (VZV) following decline in cell-mediated immunity. All over the world, in the past couple of years, the Corona Virus 2019 (COVID-19) has emerged as a viral cause of severe acute respiratory syndrome corona virus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection. Based on the current limited evidence, co-infection of COVID-19 with VZV or reactivation of VZV after COVID-19 vaccination has been sporadically reported. All patients diagnosed with HZ, in Farwaniya Hospital in Kuwait, from March 2020 to July 2021, having either (A) a positive COVID-19 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test, or (B) been vaccinated against SARS-CoV-2 were enrolled in the study. All patients' demographic information, medical history, laboratory findings, and vaccination status was documented. All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS Statistics version 21.0 software. Twelve cases infected with COVID-19 with a positive PCR (group 1) and five cases vaccinated against SARS-CoV-2 (group 2) were documented. Out of the 12 COVID-19 infected patients (group 1), only two patients (16.67%) required hospitalization, while the remaining 10 patients had mild/moderate lymphopenia. Furthermore, amongst the 12 positive COVID-19 cases, four patients with HZ were diagnosed within the first week of COVID-19, while the remaining eight cases were diagnosed within 8 weeks of COVID-19. Thoracic segments were affected in five cases (41.67%), cervical in one case (8.33%), cranial in two cases (16.67%), lumbar in three cases (25%) and sacral in one case (8.33%). In group 2, three patients presented with HZ within 4 weeks of having received the first dose of the vaccine and two patients after the second dose. Blood investigations for all five vaccinated patients did not show any abnormalities. Cervical segments were affected in two patients (40%), and cranial, thoracic, and lumbar segment in the remaining patients respectively (20%). Experts must be aware of the probable increased risk of HZ during the COVID 19 pandemic. We propose appropriate curative and preventive measures against HZ infection, including a systematic follow-up of these patients to ensure that they stick to extreme safety measures till the diagnosis of COVID-19 is omitted. 