INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES: Information about epidemiology, ventilation 
management and outcome in postoperative intensive care unit (ICU) patients 
remains scarce. The objective was to test whether postoperative ventilation 
differs from that in the operation room.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: This was a substudy of the worldwide observational LAS 
VEGAS study, including patients undergoing non-thoracic surgeries. Of 146 study 
sites participating in the LAS VEGAS study, 117 (80%) sites reported on the 
postoperative ICU course, including ventilation and complications. The coprimary 
outcomes were two key elements of ventilator management, i.e., tidal volume (VT) 
and positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP). Secondary outcomes included the 
proportion of patients receiving low VT ventilation (LTVV, defined as 
ventilation with a median VT < 8.0 ml/kg PBW), and the proportion of patients 
developing postoperative pulmonary complications (PPC), including ARDS, 
pneumothorax, pneumonia and need for escalation of ventilatory support, ICU and 
hospital length of stay, and mortality at day 28.
RESULTS: Of 653 patients who were admitted to the ICU after surgery, 274 (42%) 
patients received invasive postoperative ventilation. Median postoperative VT 
was 8.4 [7.3-9.8] ml/kg predicted body weight (PBW), PEEP was 5 [5-5] cm H2O, 
statistically significant but not meaningfully different from median 
intraoperative VT (8.1 [7.3-8.9] ml/kg PBW; P < 0.001) and PEEP (4 [2-5] cm H2O; 
P < 0.001). The proportion of patients receiving LTVV after surgery was 41%. The 
PPC rate was 10%. Length of stay in ICU and hospital was independent of 
development of a PPC, but hospital mortality was higher in patients who 
developed a PPC (24 versus 4%; P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: In this observational study of patients undergoing non-thoracic 
surgeries, postoperative ventilation was not meaningfully different from that in 
the operating room. Like in the operating room, there is room for improved use 
of LTVV. Development of PPC is associated with mortality.