OBJECTIVE: The aim was to determine preoperative gut microbiota metabolites that 
may be associated with postoperative delirium (POD) development in patients and 
further study in rodents.
SUMMARY BACKGROUND DATA: POD occurs in 9% to 50% of older patients undergoing 
anesthesia/surgery but lacks effective treatments or prevention. High-throughput 
metabolomics using liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry has 
accelerated disease-related biomarkers discovery. We performed metabolomic 
studies in humans to identify potential metabolite biomarkers linked to POD and 
examined potential mechanisms in rodents.
METHODS: We performed a prospective observational cohort study to examine the 
metabolomic changes that were associated with the development of POD. Then the 
gut microbiota-related metabolomic changes were recapitulated by gut microbiota 
perturbation in rodents. POD was assessed in mice using a battery of behavioral 
tests including novel objective test, Y-maze test, open-field test, and buried 
food test. The mechanisms through which gut microbiota-related metabolomic 
changes influenced POD were examined using chemogenetics.
RESULTS: Indole-3-propionic acid (IPA) is a gut microbiota metabolite that 
belongs to the indole family. Baseline plasma levels of IPA were significantly 
inversely correlated with the onset of POD in 103 (17 cases) human individuals. 
This relationship was validated in preclinical mouse models for POD: reducing 
IPA levels through gut microbiota perturbation promoted POD-like behavior. More 
importantly, IPA administration deterred POD-like behavior. Colonization of 
germ-free mice with mutant Clostridium sporogenes that did not produce 
IPA-promoted POD-like behavior. Chemogenetic studies revealed that the 
protective effect of IPA in mice was mediated, in part, by peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1-alpha in hippocampal 
interneurons.
CONCLUSIONS: Gut microbiota-derived IPA is an important molecule implicated in 
the pathogenesis of POD, which could potentially be harnessed for POD 
prevention.