BACKGROUND: Real-world observational data are an important source of evidence on 
the treatment effectiveness for patients hospitalized with coronavirus disease 
2019 (COVID-19). However, observational studies evaluating treatment 
effectiveness based on longitudinal data are often prone to methodological 
biases such as immortal time bias, confounding bias, and competing risks.
METHODS: For exemplary target trial emulation, we used a cohort of patients 
hospitalized with COVID-19 (n = 501) in a single centre. We described the 
methodology for evaluating the effectiveness of a single-dose treatment, 
emulated a trial using real-world data, and drafted a hypothetical study 
protocol describing the main components. To avoid immortal time and time-fixed 
confounding biases, we applied the clone-censor-weight technique. We set a 5-day 
grace period as a period of time when treatment could be initiated. We used the 
inverse probability of censoring weights to account for the selection bias 
introduced by artificial censoring. To estimate the treatment effects, we took 
the multi-state model approach. We considered a multi-state model with five 
states. The primary endpoint was defined as clinical severity status, assessed 
by a 5-point ordinal scale on day 30. Differences between the treatment group 
and standard of care treatment group were calculated using a proportional odds 
model and shown as odds ratios. Additionally, the weighted cause-specific 
hazards and transition probabilities for each treatment arm were presented.
RESULTS: Our study demonstrates that trial emulation with a multi-state model 
analysis is a suitable approach to address observational data limitations, 
evaluate treatment effects on clinically heterogeneous in-hospital death and 
discharge alive endpoints, and consider the intermediate state of admission to 
ICU. The multi-state model analysis allows us to summarize results using stacked 
probability plots that make it easier to interpret results.
CONCLUSIONS: Extending the emulated target trial approach to multi-state model 
analysis complements treatment effectiveness analysis by gaining information on 
competing events. Combining two methodologies offers an option to address 
immortal time bias, confounding bias, and competing risk events. This 
methodological approach can provide additional insight for decision-making, 
particularly when data from randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are unavailable.