BACKGROUND: After amputation, many people become less active, feel lonely and 
lose independence. Understanding the factors associated with low physical 
activity levels and participation could contribute to defining key interventions 
which can support prosthesis users so they can live a more active and socially 
included lifestyle. This longitudinal observational study aims to assess 
relationships between physical activity, community participation, prosthetic 
fit, comfort and user satisfaction using actimetry, 3D scans and questionnaires 
in a Cambodian cohort of established lower limb prosthesis users.
METHODS: Twenty participants (5F:15M, nine transfemoral, eleven transtibial, 
24-60 years old and 3-43 years since amputation) were recruited. They completed 
a questionnaire which included their demographics, community participation, 
prosthesis satisfaction and comfort at the start of the study, and between three 
and six months later. Their prosthetic sockets and residual limbs were 3D 
scanned at the start and end of the study. Accelerometers were embedded under 
the cosmesis on the shank of the prosthesis, to collect ten weeks of activity 
data.
RESULTS: Participants averaged 4470 steps/day (743-7315 steps/day), and wore 
their prosthesis for most waking hours, averaging 13.4 h/day (4.5-17.6 h/day). 
Self-reported measures of activity and hours of wear correlated with these 
accelerometer data (Spearman's rho rs = 0.59, and rs = 0.71, respectively). 
Participants who were more active wore their prosthesis for more hours/day 
(Pearson r = 0.73) and were more satisfied with socket fit (rs = 0.49). A longer 
residual limb correlated with better community participation (rs = 0.56) and 
comfort (rs = 0.56). Self-reported community participation did not correlate 
with a person's activity level (rs = 0.13), or their prosthesis comfort 
(rs = 0.19), and there was only weak correlation between how important the 
activity was to an individual, and how often they participated in it 
(rs = 0.37). A simple 0-10 scale of overall comfort did not provide enough 
detail to understand the types and severity of discomfort experienced.
CONCLUSION: Associations between perceived and measured activity levels 
correlated with socket satisfaction in this cohort of people with established 
lower limb amputations. The small sample size means these correlations should be 
interpreted with caution, but they indicate variables worthy of further study to 
understand barriers to community engagement and physical activity for prosthesis 
users in Cambodia, and potentially in other settings.