INTRODUCTION: Strong evidence suggests a significant role for iron accumulation 
in the brain in addition to the well-documented neurodegenerative aspects of 
Huntington's disease (HD). The putative mechanisms by which iron is linked to 
the HD pathogenesis are multiple, including oxidative stress, ferroptosis and 
neuroinflammation. However, no previous study in a neurodegenerative disease has 
linked the observed increase of brain iron accumulation as measured by MRI with 
well-established cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and blood biomarkers for iron 
accumulation, or with associated processes such as neuroinflammation. This study 
is designed to link quantitative data from iron levels and neuroinflammation 
metabolites obtained from 7T MRI of HD patients, with specific and well-known 
clinical biofluid markers for iron accumulation, neurodegeneration and 
neuroinflammation. Biofluid markers will provide quantitative measures of 
overall iron accumulation, neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation, while MRI 
measurements on the other hand will provide quantitative spatial information on 
brain pathology, neuroinflammation and brain iron accumulation, which will be 
linked to clinical outcome measures.
METHODS: This is an observational cross-sectional study, IMAGINE-HD, in HD gene 
expansion carriers and healthy controls. We include premanifest HD gene 
expansion carriers and patients with manifest HD in an early or moderate stage. 
The study includes a 7T MRI scan of the brain, clinical evaluation, motor, 
functional, and neuropsychological assessments, and sampling of CSF and blood 
for the detection of iron, neurodegenerative and inflammatory markers. 
Quantitative Susceptibility Maps will be reconstructed using T2* weighted images 
to quantify brain iron levels and Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy will be used 
to obtain information about neuroinflammation by measuring cell-specific 
intracellular metabolites' level and diffusion. Age and sex matched healthy 
subjects are included as a control group.
DISCUSSION: Results from this study will provide an important basis for the 
evaluation of brain iron levels and neuroinflammation metabolites as an imaging 
biomarker for disease stage in HD and their relationship with the salient 
pathomechanisms of the disease on the one hand, and with clinical outcome on the 
other.