OBJECTIVES: As causative pathogens are not usually identified at the time of 
initiating antibiotics in sepsis, carbapenems are commonly used as an initial 
treatment. To reduce indiscriminate use of carbapenems, the efficacy of 
alternative empiric regimens, such as piperacillin-tazobactam and the 
fourth-generation cephalosporins, should be elucidated. This study aimed to 
evaluate survival effect associated with carbapenems as initial therapy for 
sepsis compared with these antibiotics.
DESIGN: Multicenter retrospective observational study.
SETTING: Tertiary hospitals in Japan.
PATIENTS: Adult patients diagnosed as having sepsis from 2006 to 2019.
INTERVENTIONS: Administration of carbapenems as initial antibiotic therapy.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: This study used data of adult patients with 
sepsis extracted from a large-scale database in Japan. Patients were divided 
into two groups as follows: patients receiving carbapenems and patients 
receiving noncarbapenem broad-spectrum beta-lactam antibiotics as initial 
treatment. In-hospital mortality was compared between the groups by a logistic 
regression model adjusted by an inverse probability treatment weighting using 
propensity scores. To evaluate heterogeneity of effects according to patient 
characteristics, we also fitted logistic models in several subgroups. Among 
7,392 patients with sepsis, 3,547 patients received carbapenems, and 3,845 
patients received noncarbapenem agents. The logistic model showed no significant 
association between carbapenem therapy and lower mortality (adjusted OR 0.88, p 
= 0.108). Subgroup analyses suggested that there were significant survival 
benefits associated with carbapenem therapy in patients with septic shock, in 
ICUs, or with mechanical ventilation ( p for effect modifications: < 0.001, 
0.014, and 0.105, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with the noncarbapenem broad-spectrum antibiotics, 
carbapenems as an initial therapy for sepsis were not associated with 
significantly lower mortality.