PURPOSE: Personal continuity between patient and physician is a core value of 
primary care. Although previous studies suggest that personal continuity is 
associated with fewer potentially inappropriate prescriptions, evidence on 
continuity and prescribing in primary care is scarce. We aimed to determine the 
association between personal continuity and potentially inappropriate 
prescriptions, which encompasses potentially inappropriate medications (PIMs) 
and potential prescribing omissions (PPOs), by family physicians among older 
patients.
METHODS: We conducted an observational cohort study using routine care data from 
patients enlisted in 48 Dutch family practices from 2013 to 2018. All 25,854 
patients aged 65 years and older having at least 5 contacts with their practice 
in 6 years were included. We calculated personal continuity using 3 established 
measures: the usual provider of care measure, the Bice-Boxerman Index, and the 
Herfindahl Index. We used the Screening Tool of Older Person's Prescriptions 
(STOPP) and the Screening Tool to Alert doctors to Right Treatment (START) 
specific to the Netherlands version 2 criteria to calculate the prevalence of 
potentially inappropriate prescriptions. To assess associations, we conducted 
multilevel negative binomial regression analyses, with and without adjustment 
for number of chronic conditions, age, and sex.
RESULTS: The patients' mean (SD) values for the usual provider of care measure, 
the Bice-Boxerman Continuity of Care Index, and the Herfindahl Index were 0.70 
(0.19), 0.55 (0.24), and 0.59 (0.22), respectively. In our population, 72.2% and 
74.3% of patients had at least 1 PIM and PPO, respectively; 30.9% and 34.2% had 
at least 3 PIMs and PPOs, respectively. All 3 measures of personal continuity 
were positively and significantly associated with fewer potentially 
inappropriate prescriptions.
CONCLUSIONS: A higher level of personal continuity is associated with more 
appropriate prescribing. Increasing personal continuity may improve the quality 
of prescriptions and reduce harmful consequences.