BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to evaluate whether women's ages at 
conception and the ratio of male to female infants are associated with various 
ovulation patterns.
METHODS: An observational clinical study was conducted in private OB/GYN 
clinics. Infertile women with regular menstrual cycles receiving intrauterine 
insemination (IUI) and/or in-vitro fertilization (IVF) had their ovulation 
patterns monitored in three consecutive spontaneous cycles receiving infertility 
treatment in the third cycle. Ovulation patterns were also observed in women 
with slight ovulation disorders during IUI and/or IVF in clomiphene citrate 
stimulated cycles. All the pregnant women's ages at conception and their 
respective offspring sex ratios were compared to various ovulation patterns. 
Statistical evaluation was performed using ANOVA, unpaired t test, χ2 test or 
Fisher's exact test, heterogeneity χ2 test, odds ratios at 95% confidence 
intervals and logistic regression.
RESULTS: Contralateral ovulation (i.e. ovulation jumping from ovary to the 
other) was more often observed in relatively younger women, who showed a higher 
probability of having a boy than after ipsilateral ovulation. There was a 
significantly higher frequency of boys being conceived following three 
consecutive ovulations with a left-left-right (LLR) ovulation pattern, while 
three ovulations from the left ovary (LLL) were associated with a higher 
frequency of girls. We also found two consecutive menstrual cycles the 
left-right (LR) ovulation pattern showed a similar significant difference 
compared to the left-left (LL) ovulation. Both the infertile and 
infertile + fertile women groups showing right-sided ovulation, regardless of 
age, showed significantly higher offspring sex ratio compared to left-sided 
ovulation, which was not observed in the group of fertile women alone.
CONCLUSIONS: LLR, LR and contralateral ovulation happens more often in younger 
women and favors male offspring in infertile women. Right-sided ovulation favors 
male offspring in infertile and infertile + fertile women, which was not 
observed in the group of fertile women.