OBJECTIVE: To assess whether temporal changes in antimicrobial timing for sepsis 
are associated with increasing antimicrobial use, days of therapy, or broadness 
of antimicrobial coverage among all hospitalized patients at risk for sepsis.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This is an observational cohort study of 
hospitalized patients at 152 hospitals in 2 health care systems during 2013 to 
2018, admitted via the emergency department with 2 or more systemic inflammatory 
response syndrome (SIRS) criteria. Data analysis was performed from June 10, 
2021, to March 22, 2022.
EXPOSURES: Hospital-level temporal trends in time to first antimicrobial 
administration.
OUTCOMES: Antimicrobial outcomes included antimicrobial use, days of therapy, 
and broadness of antibacterial coverage. Clinical outcomes included in-hospital 
mortality, 30-day mortality, length of hospitalization, and new 
multidrug-resistant (MDR) organism culture positivity.
RESULTS: Among 1 559 523 patients admitted to the hospital via the emergency 
department with 2 or more SIRS criteria (1 269 998 male patients [81.4%]; median 
[IQR] age, 67 [59-77] years), 273 255 (17.5%) met objective criteria for sepsis. 
In multivariable models adjusted for patient characteristics, the adjusted 
median (IQR) time to first antimicrobial administration to patients with sepsis 
decreased by 37 minutes, from 4.7 (4.1-5.3) hours in 2013 to 3.9 (3.6-4.4) hours 
in 2018, although the slope of decrease varied across hospitals. During the same 
period, antimicrobial use within 48 hours, days of antimicrobial therapy, and 
receipt of broad-spectrum coverage decreased among the broader cohort of 
patients with SIRS. In-hospital mortality, 30-day mortality, length of 
hospitalization, new MDR culture positivity, and new MDR blood culture 
positivity decreased over the study period among both patients with sepsis and 
those with SIRS. When examining hospital-specific trends, decreases in 
antimicrobial use, days of therapy, and broadness of antibacterial coverage for 
patients with SIRS did not differ by hospital antimicrobial timing trend for 
sepsis. Overall, there was no evidence that accelerating antimicrobial timing 
for sepsis was associated with increasing antimicrobial use or impaired 
antimicrobial stewardship.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this multihospital cohort study, the time to first 
antimicrobial for sepsis decreased over time, but this trend was not associated 
with increasing antimicrobial use, days of therapy, or broadness of 
antimicrobial coverage among the broader population at-risk for sepsis, which 
suggests that shortening the time to antibiotics for sepsis is feasible without 
leading to indiscriminate antimicrobial use.