BACKGROUND: Severe chronic pain that interferes with daily activities is 
associated with an increased risk of mortality. We assessed the overall 
mortality of tertiary chronic pain patients in comparison with the general 
population, with a special aim to analyse the association of health-related 
quality of life (HRQoL) and its dimensions with the risk of death.
METHODS: In this prospective observational follow-up study, patients with 
non-cancer chronic pain attended an outpatient multidisciplinary pain management 
(MPM) episode in a tertiary pain clinic in 2004-2012 and were followed until May 
2019. Mortality between the patients and the general population was compared 
with standardized mortality ratios (SMR) in different age groups. Causes of 
death and comorbidities were compared among the deceased. Association of 
mortality and HRQoL and its dimensions, measured with the 15D instrument, was 
studied with Cox proportional hazards model.
RESULTS: During a mean of 10.4-year follow-up of 1498 patients, 296 died. The 
SMR in the youngest age group (18-49 years) was significantly higher than that 
of the general population: 2.6 for males and 2.9 for females. Even elderly 
females (60-69 years) had elevated mortality (SMR 2.3). Low baseline HRQoL at 
the time of MPM, as well as poor ratings in the psychosocial dimensions of 
HRQoL, was associated with an increased risk of death.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support the role of HRQoL measurement by a validated 
instrument such as the 15D in capturing both the physical and the psychological 
symptom burden, and consequently, an elevated risk of death, in patients with 
chronic pain.
SIGNIFICANCE: Severe chronic pain is associated with elevated mortality. In 
patients in chronic pain under 50 years old, the mortality was 2.5-3 times 
higher than in the general population. Psychological distress appears to 
contribute to the increased mortality. Regular follow-up by health-related 
quality of life (HRQoL) measurement could be useful in identifying patients in 
chronic pain who are in need of intensive symptom management and to prevent 
early death.