BACKGROUND: Hundreds of thousands of biodigesters have been constructed in 
Nepal. These household-level systems use human and animal waste to produce 
clean-burning biogas used for cooking, which can reduce household air pollution 
from woodburning cookstoves and prevent respiratory illnesses. The biodigesters, 
typically operated by female caregivers, require the handling of animal waste, 
which may increase domestic fecal contamination, exposure to diarrheal 
pathogens, and the risk of enteric infections, especially among young children.
OBJECTIVE: We estimated the effect of daily reported biogas cookstove use on 
incident diarrhea among children  < 5 y old in the Kavrepalanchok District of 
Nepal. Secondarily, we assessed effect measure modification and statistical 
interaction of individual- and household-level covariates (child sex, child age, 
birth order, exclusive breastfeeding, proof of vaccination, roof type, 
sanitation, drinking water treatment, food insecurity) as well as recent 14-d 
acute lower respiratory infection (ALRI) and season.
METHODS: We analyzed 300,133 person-days for 539 children in an observational 
prospective cohort study to estimate the average effect of biogas stove use on 
incident diarrhea using cross-validated targeted maximum likelihood estimation 
(CV-TMLE).
RESULTS: Households reported using biogas cookstoves in the past 3 d for 23% of 
observed person-days. The adjusted relative risk of diarrhea for children 
exposed to biogas cookstove use was 1.31 (95% confidence interval (CI): 1.00, 
1.71) compared to unexposed children. The estimated effect of biogas stove use 
on diarrhea was stronger among breastfed children (2.09; 95% CI: 1.35, 3.25) 
than for nonbreastfed children and stronger during the dry season (2.03; 95% CI: 
1.17, 3.53) than in the wet season. Among children exposed to biogas cookstove 
use, those with a recent ALRI had the highest mean risk of diarrhea, estimated 
at 4.53 events (95% CI: 1.03, 8.04) per 1,000 person-days.
DISCUSSION: This analysis provides new evidence that child diarrhea may be an 
unintended health risk of biogas cookstove use. Additional studies are needed to 
identify exposure pathways of fecal pathogen contamination associated with 
biodigesters to improve the safety of these widely distributed public health 
interventions.