BACKGROUND: In the past few decades, globalization has rendered more frequent 
and intensive population movement between countries, which has changed the 
original disease spectrum and brought a huge health impact on the global 
population including China. This study aims to describe the spectrum and 
epidemiological characteristics of imported infections among foreign travelers 
travelling to China.
METHODS: The data on imported infections among foreign travelers were obtained 
from Custom Inbound Screening System (CISS) and the National Notifiable 
Infectious Disease Reporting System (NNIDRS). All the infections were classified 
into respiratory, gastrointestinal, vector-borne, blood/sex-transmitted and 
mucocutaneous diseases, of which case numbers and incidences were calculated and 
the proportions were compared among subgroups.
RESULTS: In total, 17,189 travelers diagnosed with 58 imported infectious 
diseases were reported from 2014 to 2018, with an overall incidence of 122.59 
per million. Respiratory infection (7,351 cases, mainly influenza) and 
blood/sex-transmitted diseases (6,114 cases mainly Hepatitis B and HIV 
infection) were the most frequently diagnosed diseases, followed by vector-borne 
infections (3,128 cases, mainly dengue fever and malaria). The highest case 
number was from Asia and Europe, while the highest incidence rate was from 
Africa (296.00 per million). When specific diagnosis was compared, both the 
highest absolute case number and incidence were observed for influenza. An 
obvious seasonal pattern was observed for vector-borne diseases, with the annual 
epidemic spanning from July to November. The origin-destination matrices 
disclosed the movement of imported infection followed specific routes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provided a profile of infectious diseases among foreign 
travelers travelling to China and pinpointed the target regions, seasons and 
populations for prevention and control, to attain an informed control of 
imported infections in China.