BACKGROUND: Although overall air quality has improved in the United States, air 
pollution remains unevenly distributed across neighborhoods, producing 
disproportionate environmental burdens for minoritized and socioeconomically 
disadvantaged residents for whom greater exposure to other structurally rooted 
neighborhood stressors is also more frequent. These interrelated dynamics and 
layered vulnerabilities each have well-documented associations with physical and 
psychological health outcomes; however, much remains unknown about the joint 
effects of environmental hazards and neighborhood socioeconomic factors on 
self-reported health status.
OBJECTIVES: We examined the nexus of air pollution exposure, neighborhood 
socioeconomic disadvantage, and self-rated health (SRH) among adults in the 
United States.
METHODS: This observational study used individual-level data from the Panel 
Study of Income Dynamics merged with contextual information, including 
neighborhood socioeconomic and air pollution data at the census tract and census 
block levels, spanning the period of 1999-2015. We estimated ordinary least 
squares regression models predicting SRH by 10-y average exposures to fine 
particulate matter [particles  ≤ 2.5 μm in aerodynamic diameter (PM2.5)] and 
neighborhood socioeconomic disadvantage while controlling for individual-level 
correlates of health. We also investigated the interaction effects of air 
pollution and neighborhood socioeconomic disadvantage on SRH.
RESULTS: On average, respondents in our sample rated their health as 3.41 on a 
scale of 1 to 5. Respondents in neighborhoods with higher 10-y average PM2.5 
concentrations or socioeconomic disadvantage rated their health more negatively 
after controlling for covariates [β =  - 0.024 (95% CI: - 0.034, - 0.014); β =  
- 0.107 (95% CI: - 0.163, - 0.052), respectively]. We also found that the 
deleterious associations of PM2.5 exposure with SRH were weaker in the context 
of greater neighborhood socioeconomic disadvantage (β = 0.007; 95% CI: 0.002, 
0.011).
DISCUSSION: Study results indicate that the effects of air pollution on SRH may 
be less salient in socioeconomically disadvantaged neighborhoods compared with 
more advantaged areas, perhaps owing to the presence of other more proximate 
structurally rooted health risks and vulnerabilities in disinvested areas (e.g., 
lack of economic resources, health access, healthy food options). This 
intersection may further underscore the importance of meaningful involvement and 
political power building among community stakeholders on issues concerning the 
nexus of environmental and socioeconomic justice, particularly in structurally 
marginalized communities.
