BACKGROUND: Immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI)-related pneumonitis is the most 
frequent fatal immune-related adverse event associated with programmed cell 
death protein-1/programmed death ligand-1 blockade. The pathophysiology however 
remains largely unknown, owing to limited and contradictory findings in existing 
literature pointing at either T-helper 1 or T-helper 17-mediated autoimmunity. 
In this study, we aimed to gain novel insights into the mechanisms of 
ICI-related pneumonitis, thereby identifying potential therapeutic targets.
METHODS: In this prospective observational study, single-cell RNA and T-cell 
receptor sequencing was performed on bronchoalveolar lavage fluid of 11 patients 
with ICI-related pneumonitis and 6 demographically-matched patients with cancer 
without ICI-related pneumonitis. Single-cell transcriptomic immunophenotyping 
and cell fate mapping coupled to T-cell receptor repertoire analyses were 
performed.
RESULTS: We observed enrichment of both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in ICI-pneumonitis 
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. The CD4+ T-cell compartment showed an increase of 
pathogenic T-helper 17.1 cells, characterized by high co-expression of TBX21 
(encoding T-bet) and RORC (ROR-γ), IFN-G (IFN-γ), IL-17A, CSF2 (GM-CSF), and 
cytotoxicity genes. Type 1 regulatory T cells and naïve-like CD4+ T cells were 
also enriched. Within the CD8+ T-cell compartment, mainly effector memory T 
cells were increased. Correspondingly, myeloid cells in ICI-pneumonitis 
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid were relatively depleted of anti-inflammatory 
resident alveolar macrophages while pro-inflammatory 'M1-like' monocytes 
(expressing TNF, IL-1B, IL-6, IL-23A, and GM-CSF receptor CSF2RA, CSF2RB) were 
enriched compared with control samples. Importantly, a feedforward loop, in 
which GM-CSF production by pathogenic T-helper 17.1 cells promotes tissue 
inflammation and IL-23 production by pro-inflammatory monocytes and vice versa, 
has been well characterized in multiple autoimmune disorders but has never been 
identified in ICI-related pneumonitis.
CONCLUSIONS: Using single-cell transcriptomics, we identified accumulation of 
pathogenic T-helper 17.1 cells in ICI-pneumonitis bronchoalveolar lavage fluid-a 
phenotype explaining previous divergent findings on T-helper 1 versus T-helper 
17 involvement in ICI-pneumonitis-,putatively engaging in detrimental crosstalk 
with pro-inflammatory 'M1-like' monocytes. This finding yields several novel 
potential therapeutic targets for the treatment of ICI-pneumonitis. Most notably 
repurposing anti-IL-23 merits further research as a potential efficacious and 
safe treatment for ICI-pneumonitis.