BACKGROUND: The human gut harbors trillions of microbes that play dynamic roles 
in health. While the microbiome contributes to many cardiometabolic traits by 
modulating host inflammation and metabolism, there is an incomplete 
understanding regarding the extent that and mechanisms by which individual 
microbes impact risk and development of cardiovascular disease (CVD). The 
Framingham Heart Study (FHS) is a multi-generational observational study 
following participants over decades to identify risk factors for CVD by 
correlating genetic and phenotypic factors with clinical outcomes. As a 
large-scale population-based cohort with extensive clinical phenotyping, FHS 
provides a rich landscape to explore the relationships between the gut 
microbiome and cardiometabolic traits.
METHODS: We performed 16S rRNA gene sequencing on stool from 1423 participants 
of the FHS Generation 3, OMNI2, and New Offspring Spouse cohorts. Data 
processing and taxonomic assignment were performed with the 16S bioBakery 
workflow using the UPARSE pipeline. We conducted statistical analyses to 
investigate trends in overall microbiome composition and diversity in relation 
to disease states and systematically examined taxonomic associations with a 
variety of clinical traits, disease phenotypes, clinical blood markers, and 
medications.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that overall microbial diversity decreases with 
increasing 10-year CVD risk and body mass index measures. We link lifestyle 
factors, especially diet and exercise, to microbial diversity. Our association 
analyses reveal both known and unreported microbial associations with CVD and 
diabetes, related prescription medications, as well as many anthropometric and 
blood test measurements. In particular, we observe a set of microbial species 
that demonstrate significant associations with CVD risk, metabolic syndrome, and 
type 2 diabetes as well as a number of shared associations between microbial 
species and cardiometabolic subphenotypes.
CONCLUSIONS: The identification of significant microbial taxa associated with 
prevalent CVD and diabetes, as well as risk for developing CVD, adds to 
increasing evidence that the microbiome may contribute to CVD pathogenesis. Our 
findings support new hypothesis generation around shared microbe-mediated 
mechanisms that influence metabolic syndrome, diabetes, and CVD risk. Further 
investigation of the gut microbiomes of CVD patients in a targeted manner may 
elucidate microbial mechanisms with diagnostic and therapeutic implications.