Measurement of wrist range of motion (ROM) is often considered to be an 
essential component of wrist physical examination. The measurement can be 
carried out through various instruments such as goniometers and inclinometers. 
Recent smartphones have been equipped with accelerometers and magnetometers, 
which, through specific software applications (apps) can be used for goniometric 
functions. This study, for the first time, aimed to evaluate the reliability and 
concurrent validity of a new smartphone goniometric app (Goniometer Pro©) for 
measuring active wrist ROM. In all, 120 wrists of 70 asymptomatic adults (38 men 
and 32 women; aged 18-40 years) were assessed in a physiotherapy clinic located 
at the School of Rehabilitation Sciences, Iran University of Medical Science and 
Health Services, Tehran, Iran. Following the recruitment process, active wrist 
ROM was measured using a universal goniometer and iPhone® 5 app. Two blinded 
examiners each utilized the universal goniometer and iPhone® to measure active 
wrist ROM using a volar/dorsal alignment technique in the following sequences: 
flexion, extension, radial deviation, and ulnar deviation. The second (2 h 
later) and third (48 h later) sessions were carried out in the same manner as 
the first session. All the measurements were conducted three times and the mean 
value of three repetitions for each measurement was used for analysis. 
Intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) models (3, k) and (2, k) were used to 
determine the intra-rater and inter-rater reliability, respectively. The Pearson 
correlation coefficients were used to establish concurrent validity of the 
iPhone® app. Good to excellent intra-rater and inter-rater reliability was 
demonstrated for the goniometer with ICC values of ≥ 0.82 and ≥ 0.73 and the 
iPhone® app with ICC values of ≥ 0.83 and ≥ 0.79, respectively. Minimum 
detectable change at the 95% confidence level (MDC95 ) was computed as 
1.96 × standard error of measurement × √2. The MDC95 ranged from 1.66° to 5.35° 
for the intra-rater analysis and from 1.97° to 6.15° for the inter-rater 
analysis. The concurrent validity between the two instruments was high, with r 
values of ≥ 0.80. From the results of this cross-sectional study, it can be 
concluded that the iPhone® app possesses good to excellent intra-rater and 
inter-rater reliability and concurrent validity. It seems that this app can be 
used for the measurement of wrist ROM. However, further research is needed to 
evaluate symptomatic subjects using this app.