BACKGROUND: Angelman syndrome (AS) is a rare neurodevelopmental disorder 
characterized by the absence of a functional UBE3A gene, which causes 
developmental, behavioral, and medical challenges. While currently untreatable, 
comprehensive data could help identify appropriate endpoints assessing 
meaningful improvements in clinical trials. Herein are reported the results from 
the FREESIAS study assessing the feasibility and utility of in-clinic and 
at-home measures of key AS symptoms.
METHODS: Fifty-five individuals with AS (aged < 5 years: n = 16, 5-12 years: 
n = 27, ≥ 18 years: n = 12; deletion genotype: n = 40, nondeletion genotype: 
n = 15) and 20 typically developing children (aged 1-12 years) were enrolled 
across six USA sites. Several clinical outcome assessments and digital health 
technologies were tested, together with overnight 19-lead electroencephalography 
(EEG) and additional polysomnography (PSG) sensors. Participants were assessed 
at baseline (Clinic Visit 1), 12 months later (Clinic Visit 2), and during 
intermittent home visits.
RESULTS: The participants achieved high completion rates for the clinical 
outcome assessments (adherence: 89-100% [Clinic Visit 1]; 76-91% [Clinic Visit 
2]) and varied feasibility of and adherence to digital health technologies. The 
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic impacted participants' uptake of 
and/or adherence to some measures. It also potentially impacted the at-home 
PSG/EEG recordings, which were otherwise feasible. Participants achieved 
Bayley-III results comparable to the available natural history data, showing 
similar scores between individuals aged ≥ 18 and 5-12 years. Also, participants 
without a deletion generally scored higher on most clinical outcome assessments 
than participants with a deletion. Furthermore, the observed AS EEG phenotype of 
excess delta-band power was consistent with prior reports.
CONCLUSIONS: Although feasible clinical outcome assessments and digital health 
technologies are reported herein, further improved assessments of meaningful AS 
change are needed. Despite the COVID-19 pandemic, remote assessments facilitated 
high adherence levels and the results suggested that at-home PSG/EEG might be a 
feasible alternative to the in-clinic EEG assessments. Taken altogether, the 
combination of in-clinic/at-home clinical outcome assessments, digital health 
technologies, and PSG/EEG may improve protocol adherence, reduce patient burden, 
and optimize study outcomes in AS and other rare disease populations.