BACKGROUND: Gastrointestinal mucosal injury (mucositis), commonly affecting the 
oral cavity, is a clinically significant yet incompletely understood 
complication of cancer chemotherapy. Although antineoplastic cytotoxicity 
constitutes the primary injury trigger, the interaction of oral microbial 
commensals with mucosal tissues could modify the response. It is not clear, 
however, whether chemotherapy and its associated treatments affect oral 
microbial communities disrupting the homeostatic balance between resident 
microorganisms and the adjacent mucosa and if such alterations are associated 
with mucositis. To gain knowledge on the pathophysiology of oral mucositis, 49 
subjects receiving 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) or doxorubicin-based chemotherapy were 
evaluated longitudinally during one cycle, assessing clinical outcomes, 
bacterial and fungal oral microbiome changes, and epithelial transcriptome 
responses. As a control for microbiome stability, 30 non-cancer subjects were 
longitudinally assessed. Through complementary in vitro assays, we also 
evaluated the antibacterial potential of 5-FU on oral microorganisms and the 
interaction of commensals with oral epithelial tissues.
RESULTS: Oral mucositis severity was associated with 5-FU, increased salivary 
flow, and higher oral granulocyte counts. The oral bacteriome was disrupted 
during chemotherapy and while antibiotic and acid inhibitor intake contributed 
to these changes, bacteriome disruptions were also correlated with 
antineoplastics and independently and strongly associated with oral mucositis 
severity. Mucositis-associated bacteriome shifts included depletion of common 
health-associated commensals from the genera Streptococcus, Actinomyces, 
Gemella, Granulicatella, and Veillonella and enrichment of Gram-negative 
bacteria such as Fusobacterium nucleatum and Prevotella oris. Shifts could not 
be explained by a direct antibacterial effect of 5-FU, but rather resembled the 
inflammation-associated dysbiotic shifts seen in other oral conditions. 
Epithelial transcriptional responses during chemotherapy included upregulation 
of genes involved in innate immunity and apoptosis. Using a multilayer 
epithelial construct, we show mucositis-associated dysbiotic shifts may 
contribute to aggravate mucosal damage since the mucositis-depleted 
Streptococcus salivarius was tolerated as a commensal, while the 
mucositis-enriched F. nucleatum displayed pro-inflammatory and pro-apoptotic 
capacity.
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, our work reveals that chemotherapy-induced oral 
mucositis is associated with bacterial dysbiosis and demonstrates the potential 
for dysbiotic shifts to aggravate antineoplastic-induced epithelial injury. 
These findings suggest that control of oral bacterial dysbiosis could represent 
a novel preventive approach to ameliorate oral mucositis.