BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a lung disease 
characterised by airflow-limiting inflammation and mucus production. Acute 
exacerbations are a major cause of COPD-related morbidity and mortality and are 
mostly associated with bacterial or viral infections. A vaccine targeting 
non-typeable Haemophilus influenzae (NTHi) and Moraxella catarrhalis (Mcat), the 
main bacteria associated with exacerbations, was tested in a Phase 2 trial. We 
assessed "ex-vivo" expression of vaccine candidate and housekeeping genes pd, 
pe, pilA, gapA, ompP6 of NTHi, and uspA2, parE, polA of Mcat in sputum samples 
of COPD patients and determined whether expression of the vaccine candidate 
genes pd, pe, pilA (NTHi) and uspA2 (Mcat) differed between stable and 
exacerbation samples.
METHODS: A single-centre, prospective, observational cohort study was conducted 
where 123 COPD patients were seen on enrolment, followed monthly for 2 years, 
and reviewed after onset of acute exacerbations. We selected 69 patients with 
sputum samples positive for NTHi or Mcat by PCR during at least one stable and 
one exacerbation visit. mRNA was isolated from the sputum, and expression of 
NTHi and Mcat genes was analysed with RT-PCR. Statistical analyses compared mRNA 
concentrations between stable and exacerbation samples and in relationship to 
COPD severity and exacerbation frequency.
RESULTS: The vaccine candidate genes were variably expressed in sputum samples, 
suggesting they are expressed in the lung. Absolute and relative expression of 
all NTHi vaccine candidate genes and Mcat uspA2 were similar between 
exacerbation and stable samples. Expression of pd and pilA was slightly 
associated with the number of exacerbations in the year before enrolment, and 
uspA2 with the disease severity status at enrolment.
CONCLUSIONS: The NTHi-Mcat vaccine candidate genes were expressed in sputum 
samples, and each gene had a specific level of expression. No statistically 
significant differences in gene expression were detectable between stable and 
exacerbation samples. However, the history of COPD exacerbations was slightly 
associated with the expression of pd, pilA and uspA2.