INTRODUCTION: Autonomic nervous system activity in cirrhotic portal hypertension 
is linked to hyperdynamic circulation. Heart rate variability (HRV) is a 
validated noninvasive method to assess the sympathovagal balance. To investigate 
the correlation between HRV parameters and degree of portal hypertension, we 
studied a cohort of patients with cirrhosis accounting for etiology and 
treatments.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this cross-sectional, observational cohort study, 157 
outpatients of both sex with nonalcoholic cirrhosis were assessed by upper 
gastrointestinal endoscopy to search for esophagogastric varices. 
Twenty-four-hour electrocardiogram Holter monitoring with 3 HRV parameters 
measurement [SD of the NN intervals, root mean square successive difference of 
NN intervals, and SD of the averages of NN intervals (SDANN)] according to 
time-domain analysis were performed in all patients. Sixteen patients with large 
esophagogastric varices underwent measurements of the HVPG and assessment of HRV 
parameters at baseline and after 45 days on carvedilol.
RESULTS: The liver dysfunction, expressed by Child-Pugh class or MELD score, was 
directly related to root mean square successive difference of NN intervals and 
inversely related to SDANN. Presence of ascites was inversely related to SDANN 
and to SD of the NN intervals. Treatment with carvedilol had an inverse relation 
with SDANN. Presence and size of esophagogastric varices had an inverse relation 
to SDANN and SD of the NN intervals. Upon multivariate analysis the associations 
between SDANN and Child-Pugh class, size of varices and ascites were confirmed. 
In the subgroup of 16 patients undergoing HVPG measurement, pressure gradient 
was unrelated to heart rate and HRV parameters.
CONCLUSIONS: Time-domain HRV parameters in patients with cirrhosis, confirm the 
autonomic nervous system alteration, and their correlation to the degree of 
portal hypertension suggesting a role of the ANS in hepatic decompensation.