BACKGROUND: Vascular calcification is a major cause of the high morbidity and 
mortality of cardiovascular diseases and is closely associated with the 
intestinal microbiota. Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) are derived from the 
intestinal microbiota and can also regulate intestinal microbiota homeostasis. 
However, it remains unclear whether exogenous supplementation with propionate, a 
SCFA, can ameliorate vascular calcification by regulating the intestinal 
microbiota. This study was conducted to explore the roles of propionate and the 
intestinal microbiota in the process of vascular calcification.
METHODS: In total, 92 patients were enrolled consecutively as the observational 
cohort to analyse the relationship between SCFAs and vascular calcification in 
both blood and faecal samples. A rat model of vascular calcification was induced 
by vitamin D3 and nicotine (VDN) to validate the effect of propionate. 
Differences in the intestinal microbiota were analysed by 16S ribosomal RNA gene 
sequencing. Faecal microbiota transplantation and Akkermansia muciniphila 
transplantation experiments were performed to evaluate the functions of the 
intestinal microbiota.
RESULTS: The results of the observational cohort study revealed that the levels 
of SCFAs (particularly propionate) in both blood and faecal samples 
independently correlated negatively with calcification scores (P < 0.01). To 
verify the activities of propionate, it was provided to VDN-treated rats, and 
oral or rectal propionate delivery reshaped the intestinal microbiota, resulted 
in elevated SCFA production, improved intestinal barrier function and alleviated 
inflammation, ultimately ameliorating vascular calcification. Furthermore, we 
demonstrated that transplantation of the propionate-modulated intestinal 
microbiota induced beneficial outcomes similar to those with oral or rectal 
propionate administration. Interestingly, linear discriminant analysis (LDA) 
effect size (LEfSe) revealed that oral or rectal propionate administration and 
propionate-modulated intestinal microbiota transplantation both enriched 
primarily Akkermansia. Subsequently, we demonstrated that Akkermansia 
supplementation could ameliorate VDN-induced vascular calcification in rats.
CONCLUSIONS: Propionate can significantly ameliorate vascular calcification in 
VDN-treated rats, and this effect is mediated by intestinal microbiota 
remodelling. The findings in our study indicate that the intestinal tract-vessel 
axis is a promising target for alleviating vascular calcification.