BACKGROUND: About 70% of Ghanaians depend on traditional, complementary and 
integrative medicine (TCIM) practices for primary healthcare needs. It was 
therefore integrated into mainstream healthcare delivery system by the Ministry 
of Health in September 2012. LEKMA hospital was one of the institutions for 
piloting TCIM services. We assessed factors that promote the usage and 
sustainability of TCIM services within the formal healthcare system.
METHODS: We conducted a cross-sectional study from April-June 2017 at the LEKMA 
hospital, Accra, Ghana. Patients and managers of TCIM clinic were interviewed. 
Data was collected through qualitative and quantitative approaches. We defined 
usage of TCIM as its current use, and sustainability as structures in place to 
run TCIM services. For assessing usage, a five-point Likert scale was used to 
assess five domain areas via exit interviews. Managers were assessed on the 
sustainability of TCIM services through in-depth interviews. Likert scales 
responses were analysed quantitatively using descriptive tertile statistics. 
Thematic analysis was used for qualitative analysis.
RESULTS: Overall, 72.7% (40/55) of the clients showed a high preference for TCIM 
usage and 80.0% (4/5) of the managers valued it as partially sustainable. Eighty 
per cent (44/55) of patients indicated that the location of TCIM services and 
availability of visible directional signs influenced the good usage; 84% (46/55) 
of the patients agreed that the usage of TCIM was influenced by their perceived 
effectiveness. Managers indicated that human resources for providing services 
was a challenge and TCIM integration into the operations of the hospital needed 
to be improved.
CONCLUSION: We observed a high preference for usage of TCIM among users at LEKMA 
hospital. The general belief in the potency, perceived effectiveness, location 
and availability of TCIM services are key determinants of the high preference 
for usage of TCIM. Provision of TCIM services in its current form is partially 
sustainable from the managers' perspective. We recommend that the Ministry of 
Health ensures the availability of staff and create awareness of TCIM services 
among the general populace.