BACKGROUND: In the course of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, multiple vaccines were 
developed. Little was known about reactogenicity and safety in comparison to 
established vaccines, e.g. influenza, pneumococcus, or herpes zoster. Therefore, 
the present study aimed to compare self-reported side effects in persons 
vaccinated against SARS-CoV-2 with the incidence of side effects in persons 
receiving one of the established vaccines.
METHODS: A longitudinal observational study was conducted over a total of 
124 days using web-based surveys. Persons receiving either a vaccination against 
SARS-CoV-2 or one of the established vaccines (comparator group) were included. 
In the first questionnaire (short-term survey), 2 weeks after vaccination, 
mainly local and systemic complaints were evaluated. The long-term survey 
(42 days after vaccination) and follow-up survey (124 weeks after vaccination) 
focused on medical consultations for any reason. Multivariate analyses were 
conducted to determine the influence of the vaccine type (SARS-CoV-2 vs. 
comparator) and demographic factors.
RESULTS: In total, data from 16,636 participants were included. Self-reported 
reactogenicity was lowest in the comparator group (53.2%) and highest in the 
ChAdOx1 group (85.3%). Local reactions were reported most frequently after 
mRNA-1273 (73.9%) and systemic reactions mainly after vector-based vaccines 
(79.8%). Almost all SARS-CoV-2 vaccines showed increased odds of reporting local 
or systemic reactions. Approximately equal proportions of participants reported 
medical consultations. None in the comparator group suspected a link to 
vaccination, while this was true for just over one in 10 in the mRNA-1273 group. 
The multivariate analysis showed that people with SARS-CoV-2 vaccination were 
not more likely to report medical consultations; patients who had received a 
regimen with at least one ChAdOx1 were even less likely to report medical 
consultations. Younger age, female gender and higher comorbidity were mostly 
associated with higher odds of medical consultations.
CONCLUSION: The rate of adverse reactions after established vaccinations was 
roughly comparable to previous studies. Two weeks after vaccination, 
participants in the SARS-CoV-2 vaccination group reported more local and 
systemic local reactions than participants in the comparator group. In the 
further course, however, there were no higher odds of medical consultations in 
either of the two groups. Thus, altogether, we assume comparable safety.