BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The gut microbiota is implicated in the pathogenesis of 
colorectal cancer (CRC). We aimed to map the CRC mucosal microbiota and 
metabolome and define the influence of the tumoral microbiota on oncological 
outcomes.
METHODS: A multicentre, prospective observational study was conducted of CRC 
patients undergoing primary surgical resection in the UK (n = 74) and Czech 
Republic (n = 61). Analysis was performed using metataxonomics, 
ultra-performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS), targeted 
bacterial qPCR and tumour exome sequencing. Hierarchical clustering accounting 
for clinical and oncological covariates was performed to identify clusters of 
bacteria and metabolites linked to CRC. Cox proportional hazards regression was 
used to ascertain clusters associated with disease-free survival over median 
follow-up of 50 months.
RESULTS: Thirteen mucosal microbiota clusters were identified, of which five 
were significantly different between tumour and paired normal mucosa. Cluster 7, 
containing the pathobionts Fusobacterium nucleatum and Granulicatella adiacens, 
was strongly associated with CRC (PFDR = 0.0002). Additionally, tumoral 
dominance of cluster 7 independently predicted favourable disease-free survival 
(adjusted p = 0.031). Cluster 1, containing Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and 
Ruminococcus gnavus, was negatively associated with cancer (PFDR = 0.0009), and 
abundance was independently predictive of worse disease-free survival (adjusted 
p = 0.0009). UPLC-MS analysis revealed two major metabolic (Met) clusters. Met 
1, composed of medium chain (MCFA), long-chain (LCFA) and very long-chain 
(VLCFA) fatty acid species, ceramides and lysophospholipids, was negatively 
associated with CRC (PFDR = 2.61 × 10-11); Met 2, composed of 
phosphatidylcholine species, nucleosides and amino acids, was strongly 
associated with CRC (PFDR = 1.30 × 10-12), but metabolite clusters were not 
associated with disease-free survival (p = 0.358). An association was identified 
between Met 1 and DNA mismatch-repair deficiency (p = 0.005). FBXW7 mutations 
were only found in cancers predominant in microbiota cluster 7.
CONCLUSIONS: Networks of pathobionts in the tumour mucosal niche are associated 
with tumour mutation and metabolic subtypes and predict favourable outcome 
following CRC resection.