BACKGROUND: Cannabinoids are considered a therapeutic option to patients 
suffering from treatment refractory chronic pain (TRCP) insufficiently relieved 
by conventional analgesics or experiencing intolerable adverse events (AEs) from 
those. This study aimed to explore safety and effectiveness of oral cannabinoids 
among patients with TRCP.
METHODS: A retrospective study was conducted among Danish patients with TRCP 
being prescribed oral cannabinoids. Data on AEs and changes in pain intensity by 
numeric rating scale (NRS) before and after initiation of oral cannabinoid 
therapy were analysed.
RESULTS: Among 826 eligible patients ≥18 years old, 529 (64%) were included for 
data analysis at first follow-up (F/U1) (median 56 days from baseline) and 214 
(26%) for second follow-up (F/U2) (median 126 days from F/U1). Mean age was 
60 ± 15.9 years and 70% were females. AEs were in general reported mild to 
moderate by 42% of patients at F/U1 and 34% at F/U2. AEs were mainly related to 
gastrointestinal (F/U1: 17% and F/U2: 13%) and nervous system disorders (F/U1: 
14% and F/U2: 11%). Reduction in NRS was significantly different at both 
follow-up consultations compared with baseline (<0.0001). Clinically relevant 
pain reduction (NRS ≥30%) was reported by 17% at F/U1 and 10% of patients at 
F/U2 in intention-to-treat analysis whereas the figures were 32% and 45% 
respectively, in per-protocol analysis.
CONCLUSION: Oral cannabinoid therapy seems to be safe and mildly effective in 
patients with TRCP. Randomized controlled trials with focus on comparable pain 
characteristics in diagnostical homogenous patient subgroups are needed for 
further improvement of evidence level for relief of chronic pain using oral 
cannabinoids.
SIGNIFICANCE: The findings in this retrospective study conducted in a real-world 
clinical setting suggest a favourable safety profile of cannabinoids. Moreover, 
one-sixth (intention-to-treat) and one-third (per-protocol) of patients with 
chronic pain refractory to conventional analgesics, or experiencing intolerable 
adverse effects, benefited significantly from therapy with oral cannabinoid 
regimens. Combination of THC and CBD seems overall more effective than 
cannabinoid monotherapy. Conduction of randomized controlled trials 
investigating safety and efficacy of cannabinoid therapy to diagnosis specific 
patient subgroups with comparable clinical and pathophysiological chronic pain 
characteristics is warranted, hence contributing further to the process of 
clinical evidence clarification currently in progress.