PURPOSE: The heterogeneity in sepsis is held responsible, in part, for the lack 
of precision treatment. Many attempts to identify subtypes of sepsis patients 
identify those with shared underlying biology or outcomes. To date, though, 
there has been limited effort to determine overlap across these previously 
identified subtypes. We aimed to determine the concordance of critically ill 
patients with sepsis classified by four previously described subtype strategies.
METHODS: This secondary analysis of a multicenter prospective observational 
study included 522 critically ill patients with sepsis assigned to four 
previously established subtype strategies, primarily based on: (i) clinical data 
in the electronic health record (α, β, γ, and δ), (ii) biomarker data (hyper- 
and hypoinflammatory), and (iii-iv) transcriptomic data (Mars1-Mars4 and 
SRS1-SRS2). Concordance was studied between different subtype labels, clinical 
characteristics, biological host response aberrations, as well as combinations 
of subtypes by sepsis ensembles.
RESULTS: All four subtype labels could be adjudicated in this cohort, with the 
distribution of the clinical subtype varying most from the original cohort. The 
most common subtypes in each of the four strategies were γ (61%), which is 
higher compared to the original classification, hypoinflammatory (60%), Mars2 
(35%), and SRS2 (54%). There was no clear relationship between any of the 
subtyping approaches (Cramer's V = 0.086-0.456). Mars2 and SRS1 were most alike 
in terms of host response biomarkers (p = 0.079-0.424), while other subtype 
strategies showed no clear relationship. Patients enriched for multiple subtypes 
revealed that characteristics and outcomes differ dependent on the combination 
of subtypes made.
CONCLUSION: Among critically ill patients with sepsis, subtype strategies using 
clinical, biomarker, and transcriptomic data do not identify comparable patient 
populations and are likely to reflect disparate clinical characteristics and 
underlying biology.