BACKGROUND: The efficacy of mepolizumab is well documented in severe 
eosinophilic asthma (SEA), although the stringent selection criteria adopted by 
SEA clinical trials limits the generalizability of results.
OBJECTIVE: Our study evaluated the effectiveness and safety of mepolizumab in 
patients with SEA in Spain. The primary efficacy endpoint was the change in the 
rate of clinically significant asthma exacerbations 12 months after starting 
mepolizumab compared to the baseline rate in the 12 months prior to treatment. 
Patients were stratified by baseline blood eosinophil counts.
METHODS: We conducted a multicentric observational cohort study of SEA patients 
treated with mepolizumab across 24 specialized hospital asthma units in Spain. 
Severe exacerbation rate, lung function, oral corticosteroid use (OCS) and 
asthma control test (ACT) were retrospectively collected and compared during the 
12-month pre- and post-mepolizumab treatment. Adverse events were also 
investigated.
RESULTS: A total of 318 patients with SEA were included (mean age: 56.6 years, 
69.2% female). Exacerbation rates decreased by 77.5%, and 50.6% of patients did 
not suffer any exacerbations during the 12 months of treatment. The difference 
in forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) pre- and post-bronchodilator after 
starting mepolizumab was 0.21 (0.46) L (95% CI 0.14-0.27) (p < 0.001). 
Exacerbations and lung function significantly improved across all eosinophil 
subgroups. Among the 98 patients on OCS, 47.8% were able to discontinue this 
treatment and the mean daily dose was decreased by 59.9%. The baseline ACT score 
was 14.1, increasing by a mean (SD) of 6.7 points (1.9) at 12 months. Adverse 
events related to mepolizumab were uncommon.
CONCLUSIONS: This real-world study of SEA patients confirms that mepolizumab is 
effective in reducing clinically meaningful exacerbations, improving lung 
function, and decreasing OCS dependence and mean OCS dose at 12 months, 
irrespective of baseline eosinophil counts.