Context: Acute sore throat is a common presentation in primary care and often 
results in antibiotic prescription. The Covid pandemic has driven changes in 
consultation with less face to face visits. Scoring tools are available to 
target antibiotics and widely used in the UK but it is not clear whether patient 
self assessment is feasible and sufficiently precise to enable remote use of 
scoring tools. Objective: A feasibility study to develop and test remote 
assessment of acute sore throat. Design: Observational study Setting: UK primary 
care Population: Adults and children with sore throat were asked to use the 
online tool and report their clinical findings directly Intervention: An online 
tool was developed that could help patients or parents of children with sore 
throat assess the clinical features that make up clinical prediction rules and 
to take a photograph of the throat Results: 221 patients with sore throat were 
screened and 45 (33 adults and 12 children) were recruited. 44/45 (97.8%) 
participants were able to complete all elements of the clinical assessment. It 
was possible to calculate a FeverPAIN score for 25 (75.8%) adults and 10 (83.3%) 
children. 35 participants (25 (75.8%) adults and 10 (83.3%) children) provided a 
throat photograph but many of these were not of sufficient quality to enable 
assessment of throat pus and inflammation. Poor lighting and focus were the main 
problems. Photos that were of sufficient quality were available from 13 (39.4%) 
adults and 5 (41.7%) children. Three GPs independently assessed these 
photographs to assess for inflammation and pus. Using the clinician assessment 
as the reference standard, self/parent/carer assessment of inflammation had a 
sensitivity of 100%, specificity of 46.7%, positive predictive value (PPV) of 
27.3% and negative predictive value (NPV) of 100%. The sensitivity, specificity, 
PPV and NPV for pus were 76.5%, 100%, 71.4%, 42.9% and 100%. Conclusions: Self 
assessment of sore throat was possible. Photographs were of sufficient quality 
for clinical assessment less than half the time. Patients/parents/carers are 
very good at ruling out pus and inflammation, but have a tendency to overcall 
these findings, especially inflammation. Further implications for self 
assessment and future work will be described.