BACKGROUND: Co-development alliances and capital-raising activities are 
essential supports for biopharmaceutical innovation. During the initial outbreak 
of the COVID-19, the level of these business activities has increased greatly. 
Yet the magnitude, direction, and duration of the trend remain ambiguous. 
Real-time real-world data are needed to inform strategic redirections and 
industrial policies.
METHODS: This observational study aims to characterize trends in global 
biopharma innovation activities throughout the global pandemic outbreak. Our 
extensive deal dataset is retrieved from the commercial database GlobalData 
(12,866 partnership deals and 32,250 fundraising deals announced between 2011 
and 2022). We perform Chi-squared tests to examine the changes in qualitative 
deal attributes during and beyond the outbreak. Our deal-level sample is further 
aggregated into category-level panel data according to deal characteristics such 
as therapy area, molecule type, and development phase. We run a series of 
regressions to examine how the monthly investment amount raised in each category 
changed with the onset of the pandemic, controlling for the US Federal funds 
rate.
RESULTS: The temporary surge of partnership and capital-raising activities was 
associated with the increase in infectious disease-related deals. Academic and 
government institutions played an increased role in supporting COVID-related 
co-development partnerships in 2020, and biopharma ventures had been securing 
more investments in the capital market throughout 2020 and 2021. The partnership 
and investment boom did not last till the later pandemic in 2022. The most 
significant and enduring trend was the shifting focus toward discovery-phase 
investments. Our regression model reveals that the discovery-phase fundraising 
deals did not suffer from a bounce back in the late pandemic, consistent with a 
persistent focus on early innovation.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the reduced level of partnership and fundraising activities 
during 2022, we observe a lasting change in focus toward biopharmaceutical 
innovation after the pandemic outbreak. Our evidence suggests how entrepreneurs 
and investors should allocate resources in response to the post-pandemic tight 
monetary environment. We also suggest the need for policy interventions in 
financing private/public co-development partnerships and non-COVID-related 
technologies, to maintain their research capacity and generate breakthroughs 
when faced with unforeseen diseases.