Introduction

The gut microbiota plays a key role in determining 
the features of the gut microbiome, and one aspect 
which defines the gut microbiota is diet.1–4 Over the 
last two decades, we have steadily developed a better 
understanding of the roles that the gut microbiota 
plays in the gut and extra-intestinally in the host.5,6 
Furthermore, we can map the relationship between 
the host and its microbiota in more detail in rodents 
raised in a sterile environment, and we see how wide 
the impact of many subsystems within the host is 
felt. Therefore, voluntary or involuntary changes to 
our dietary intake not only affect the host but it 
impacts the gut microbiota which can disturb its 
regular functions. Thus, impacts of dietary interventions 
now need to be measured in a much more 
holistic fashion and not simply from the point of 
view of the host’s metabolism and physiology.

For one group of individuals, namely gastrostomy 
fed children, diets are usually nutritionally very well 
controlled. These children are unable to swallow safely, 
or take sufficient diet orally, due to, in the main part, an 
underlying condition such as a neurological impairment. 
They are fed directly into their stomach via 
a surgically placed tube. The gastrostomy tube has 
a narrow internal diameter; therefore, the food being 
administered needs to be given as a liquid. Specialized 
‘formulae feeds’, or diets, have been developed by commercial 
companies to give the exact nutritional requirements 
for a gastrostomy fed child. As well as being 
nutritionally complete, the formula diets are convenient, 
portable and can be administered to a regular 
feeding regimen. Historically they have been endorsed 
and prescribed by clinicians as they can calculate the 
exact amount of micronutrients and calories required 
by each individual child.

However, it has been reported by several families 
that this method and approach to feeding can separate 
the child from the rest of the family during 
mealtimes.7 Some clinicians and patients are now 
questioning the impact of formula diets on, not 
only the health and mental well-being of the 
patients and their families, but also on the digestive 
system of the patients too.8 An alternative approach 
which uses blended “home foods” has started to 
gain attention in families with gastrostomy fed 
children; however, only one study has been undertaken 
to assess to what extent the switch to 
a blended diet affects the child’s gut microbiota.9 
This study reported changes in Proteobacteria and 
Firmicutes, but did not undertake an in-depth analysis 
of the microbiota over time or its associated 
metabonome. In comparison to the formula diets, 
which have a controlled nutritional content, these 
blended diets can vary in their nutritional content 
and there is a concern that to achieve the correct 
consistency to administer via gastrostomy, blended 
diets need to be diluted, which may reduce nutritional 
quality, also there are concerns about the risk 
of infection due to the way the feeds are prepared.10

Hence, we undertook an observational study of 
families with gastrostomy fed children in the South 
Wales region between 2017 and 2019 and collected 
stool samples from children on blended and formula 
diets, and where possible, their siblings too. 
Using these samples, we pursued a metataxonomic, 
metabonomic, limited culturomics, QoL questionnaire 
and exo-proteome analysis to measure features 
in the three cohorts.

Results

Study cohort and questionnaire results

Most gastrostomy-fed participants had feeding 
issues from birth and the mean length of time that 
participants were tube-fed was 7.5 years. Tube- 
feeding was the sole source of nutrition for most 
of the children in both FD and BD groups, with 
only seven parents stating that their child consumed 
some small amounts of food orally. All 
participants initially received a formula diet, but 
some moved to a blended diet after experiencing 
gastrointestinal disturbances. The participants 
receiving a blended diet did so for an average of 
2.1 years at the time of sampling. The contents of 
the blended diets varied between participants, 
depending on what was being eaten at home, and 
a variety of different formula diets were used by the 
subjects of this study. The demographics for the 
study group were analyzed, where the data were 
available. No significant differences were seen 
between age (95% CI -2.28 to 2.43, P = .9707) 
and gender (P = .7530), with a median age of 
6 years and 6.5 years for the BD and FD groups, 
respectively, and a gender split of 15:13 M:F for the 
BD group and 10:6 M:F for the FD group.

From the questionnaire, it was clear that the 
blended diet was not statistically different to the 
formulae fed in 3 of the 7 categories that we measured, 
namely gastrostomy tube blockage, tube 
damage/leakage and infection rates (Figure 1). 
Bowel disturbances were significantly reduced in 
the blended diet (BD) compared to the formulae 
diet (FD) (6.3% vs 70%, P = .009), respectively, as 
was total vomiting/retching (BD 12.5% v FD 50%, 
P < .001). Both general health and mood were also 
reported to have significantly improved in the BD 
vs FD groups. More details from the questionnaire 
are shown in supplementary figures S1-S6.

Metataxonomic analysis of the three groups, 
formulae fed children show the largest differences

Metataxonomic analysis showed significant differences 
between the community structure of the 
Formulae fed vs the Sibling group (Figure 2a. 
PERMANOVA analysis F Model 5.72, R2 0 Padj 
= 0.006), but not between the bacterial communities 
of the Blended vs Formulae, or Blended vs 
Sibling groups. The PCA of the samples shows no 
clustering according to the family from which they 
originated (Figure 2b), for example in family 
B (denoted by .), the two healthy siblings were 
much closer to each other, than they were to the 
sibling being given a Formulae diet. For the NMDS 
plots of the Weighted Unifrac distance 
(Supplemental Figure S7) the Formulae group 
appears to be more diverse than the Blended or 
Sibling groups, the ratio of the areas of the 95% 
CI ellipses was approximately 1:0.43:0.26 for the 
Formulae:Blended:Sibling groups in Supp Fig S7. 
This difference shows that the stool samples in the 
Blended and Sibling groups were more like each 
other, in their respective group, and showed less 
diversity, as measured using a ß-diversity index, 
than the Formulae group. qPCR of the 16S rRNA 
gene load for each group (Supplemental Fig S8) led 
us to conclude that between the Blended and 
Sibling groups the overall abundance was significantly 
lower in the former (-377881, 95% CI 
-696867 to -58895; P = .023). There was no 

significant difference between the 16S rRNA gene 
counts in the Sibling and Formulae group or 
Blended and Formulae, however there was a trend 
of increasing 16S rRNA genes in the groups: 
2.30 × 105 ± 5.03x105 vs 6.06 × 106 ± 1.07x106 vs 
6.08 × 105 ± 5.76x105 for the Blended vs Formulae 
vs Sibling groups, respectively. While the qPCR 
data trends toward higher bacterial load, the variation 
is too large to determine if this difference was 
significant. The qPCR adjusted phylum bar plots 
are shown in Figure S8 and reflect the overall similar 
abundance of the phyla between the three 
groups. The alpha diversity for each group is 
shown in Figure 3, and there was a clear reduction 
of the alpha diversity in both diet groups when 
compared to the Sibling group (Figures 3A and 
3b), but not between the feeding regimes. When 
comparing siblings from the same family 
(Figures 3C and 3d) it was clear that there was no 
consistent pattern, with some siblings on defined 
diets having either higher or lower alpha diversity 
than their healthy comparator.

When the communities were analyzed in more 
detail, significant differences were observed for 
a wide range of genera (Figure 4). There were more 
genera found to be different in the analysis of the 
Formulae vs Sibling groups (78 features after correcting 
for multiple testing and 18 showing an effect size 
>1%), compared to the comparison of the Blended vs 
Sibling (64 features after correcting for multiple testing, 
and 7 showing an effect size >1%) and Blended vs 
Formulae (55 features after correcting for multiple 
testing, and 6 showing an effect size >1%). The largest 
changes were seen in ASVs from the Anaerostipes and 
Bifidobacterium, with the former enriched, 14.1%, 
and the latter depleted, 14.2%, in the Formulae fed 
children, compared to the Sibling group. In the 
Blended diet group, there were modest enrichments, 
between 1% and 3%, of the Enterococcus, 
Erysipelatoclostridium, Lachnoclostridium and 
Klebsiella genera, while Dialister, an ASV called 
Ruminococcus_2 and Subdoligranulum genera were 
depleted compared to the Sibling group. Between 
the Blended and Formulae groups, the main change 
was an enrichment of the Anaerostipes ASVs in the 
Formulae group, 13.3%. In fact, this change was the 
main feature of the formulae group that there was 
a significant increase in the ASVs from the genus 
Anaerostipes. Additionally, Tukey-Kramer post hoc 
test results, comparing all three groups, identified 
that the Formulae group had significantly more 
Holdemania than both the Blended diet (P < .001) 
and healthy Sibling groups (P < .01). Significantly 
more Lachnoclostridium was present in both the 
Formulae and Blended diet groups than in the 
Sibling group (P = .0015)

There were 16 sibling pairs with matched samples, 
10 Blended diet and 6 Formulae diet. Examining the 
phylum-level taxonomic profiles of each sibling pair 
showed some general trends (Fig. S10). Children on 

both Blended and Formula diets showed greater 
enrichment of members of the Firmicutes than 
their healthy sibling counterparts, 11/16. Blended 
diet samples generally contained more 
Gammaproteobacteria, Bacilli, Erysipelotrichia and 
Coriobacteria than their siblings, while the siblings 
contained more Bacteroidia. Formulae diet samples 
generally contained more members of the class 
Bacteroidia, Clostridia and Erysipelotrichia than 
their sibling counterparts, while the siblings 
0.018.6Mean proportion (%)
Clostridium_sensu_stricto_1IntestinibacterPrevotella_9BifidobacteriumFaecalibacteriumDialisterSellimonasEggerthellaSubdoligranulumEubacteriumLachnoclostridiumAnaerostipesAgathobacterRuminococcus_2RoseburiaUBA1819Erysipelatoclostridiumunclassified_Erysipelotrichaceae3020100102030Difference in mean proportions (%)
95%confidenceintervals0.0460.0280.0270.0160.0107.39e-30.0200.0120.0119.32e-36.75e-36.32e-35.93e-35.76e-35.44e-34.90e-34.08e-34.00e-3q-value (corrected)
FormulaeSibling0.04.3Mean proportion (%)
SubdoligranulumRuminococcus_2KlebsiellaLachnoclostridiumErysipelatoclostridiumEnterococcusDialister6420246Difference in mean proportions (%)
95% confidence intervals0.0350.0160.0128.90e-38.51e-37.25e-35.29e-3q-value (corrected)
BlendedSibling0.017.1Mean proportion (%)
AgathobacterFaecalibacteriumAlistipesAnaerostipesVeillonellaRoseburia2520151050510Difference in mean proportions (%)
95% confidence intervals0.0460.0450.0440.0130.0126.12e-3q-value (corrected)
BlendedFormulaeFigure 4. Extended error bar plots showing statistically significant differences between genera in a two-group analysis, between the 
different groups, e.g. blended diet vs formula diet. All reported P value are adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg 
FDR method, and an effect size filter of 1% was applied to leave only changes that were > 1% between groups. The genera differences 
between groups was tested using White’s non-parametric t-test.

contained more Actinobacteria. Analyzing the individual 
sibling pairs further down the taxonomic 
levels showed similar results in the overall dataset. 
The sibling group possessed more Ruminococcus 
ASVs than both their blended diet and formula 
diet counterparts and more of the beneficial 
Bifidobacterium than the formula diet group. 
Children from the blended diet group contained 
more of the beneficial bacteria Lactobacillus than 
their siblings and the siblings contained more 
Roseburia, Dialister, Anaerostipes, Prevotella and 
Faecalibacterium

Inferred metabolic pathways using Piphillin

Three metabolic pathways showed statistically 
significant differences between the Formulae 
and Blended diet groups: BioCyc annotation 
RXN-14277, RXN-14274 and RXN-17782 (Data 
not shown). The differences in mean proportion 
of the pathways between these two groups, 
although statistically significant, were very 
small, <0.007%. These three reaction pathways 
were identified using the MetaCyc database and 
were found to be involved in fatty acid 
oxidation.11 All three of these fatty acid oxidation 
pathways were significantly more prevalent 
in samples from children fed with a Blended diet 
than with a Formulae diet.

Analysis of functions in stool samples using 
culture-based approaches and enzyme assays

Two functions were screened using a culture-based 
approach which shows the phenotype of the growing 
colony on solid media. Numbers of CFU of 
protease producing bacteria, where determined 
using lactose-free skimmed milk agar (LF-SM).12 
Eighteen random samples were selected, six from 
each test group. For all samples tested, only the 
lowest dilutions in the dilution series showed any 
protease activity through their ability to produce 
a clear zone on the LF-SM agar, and no clear 
colonies exhibiting the phenotype were observed 
at higher dilutions. Therefore, these highest dilutions 
were spread as a lawn, and incubated anaerobically, 
on new plates with the aim being to identify 
individual colonies exhibiting the phenotype of 
interest. However, no single proteolytic colonies 
were seen, and we were unable to identify and 
isolate any colonies of interest.

ß-glucuronidase producing bacteria were 
assessed by an enzyme activity assay in 30 samples, 
10 from each test group (Figs S11A and S11B). 
After adjusting the enzyme activity using the 
qPCR data, we observed that there was no difference 
between any of the diets. However, while not 
significant, the formulae feed group also had 
a higher median value for adjusted ß- 
glucuronidase activity in the stool sample.

Global metabonomic analysis of fecal samples does 
not separate the dietary groups

The PCA analysis of the full NMR spectra for each 
group (Figure 5a) shows that there was no clear 
separation of the three groups, with the Blended 
diet group showing a larger and more diverse metabolic 
space compared to the Formulae fed and 
Sibling groups. The 95% confidence ellipse showed 
that for the BD diet the metabolic space in the first 2 
dimension was much larger than that for the FD 
and siblings. OPLS-DA was used to identify the 
components that best differentiate the predefined 
classes of samples in each of the blended, formula 
and sibling groups. The OPLS-DA analysis confirmed 
that there were no discriminatory features 
between the metabolic profiles of the samples for 
comparisons between the three groups (data not 
shown). This analysis indicated that the global 
metabolic profiles between each of the Blended, 
Formulae and Sibling groups was not statistically 
different. There was a significant difference 
between the three short chain fatty acids, acetate, 
butyrate, and propionate (Figure 5b) in the blended 
and formulae feeds when compared to the sibling 
group, but not between the blended and formulae 
feed groups.

Discussion

The gut microbiota has, over the last decade, gained 
more importance as it has been shown time and 
time again to be a significant factor in host 
health.13–17 Furthermore, the gut microbial community, 
mainly bacterial in mass, sits between the 
host and its diet.18–20 It has adapted to use components 
of the diet that are not available to the host, 

for example, resistant starches21,22 and can produce 
a wide range of metabolites on which the host 
relies, for example short chain fatty acids.13 
Therefore, diet is a key driver of the composition, 
structure, and metabolic output of the gut microbiome, 
influencing gut barrier function,23 epigenetic 
status24 and inflammation.25 In gastrostomy 
fed children the diet is commonly a prescribed formulae 
feed, which, fulfills the nutritional requirement 
of the child. More recently blended diets have 
started to become more common as an alternative 
to the standardized commercial formulae feed. 
A blended diet is simply a meal, prepared at home 
and liquidized to a suitable consistency which 
allows it to be administered via the gastrostomy 
tube into the child’s stomach. However, there is 
currently a feeling amongst professionals that the 
blended diet is not safe and is substandard,7 while 
among parents of the gastrostomy fed child, report 
that commercial feeds separate the child from the 
family meal and focus only on the medical nature of 
nutrition.26 There is also an ongoing debate, among 
professionals, about the use and safety of blended 
diets for gastrostomy fed children, leading to ambiguity, 
which can create tension between the clinicians 
responsible for the child, and the parents of 
the child. Moreover, there are reports of parents 
saying that their child is physically better when on 
a BD. Hence, there is a clear need to understand 
whether a blended diet shows a significant impact 
on the gut microbiota and metabonome of gastrostomy 
fed children.

At the time of review of this work, there were no 
studies which had combined metataxonomic with 
metabonomics to investigate the microbiota and 
metabolite profiles of gastrostomy fed children, on 
blended or formulae feeds, with a comparison to 
their siblings. In undertaking this study, we wanted 
to determine the impact of the two dietary regimes 
on the structure and composition of the colonic 
microbiome and the metabolites therein. 
Moreover, we also undertook a questionnaire to 
assess a range of important lifestyle parameters in 
both cohorts of children. The results from the questionnaire 
showed that in many instances the BD 
was not inferior to the FD and was superior to the 
FD in important parameters such as vomiting and 
retching. This finding is in keeping with recent 
review of the literature7,27,28 also showing that 
blended diets are not inferior to a formulae diet 
from a QoL perspective. Recent studies of blended 
enteral diets9,29,30 have also concluded that they 
lead to improved clinical outcomes and symptom 
scores.

The analysis of the microbiota in the stool samples 
showed that the BD was not creating bacterial 
communities that were significantly different to the 
siblings and that the FD gut communities were 
significantly more different to the siblings. The 
child’s status i.e., gastrostomy fed was most probably 
one of the strongest drivers of community 
structure, which is shown in Figure 2b where the 
samples do not cluster based on family, but rather 
on diet. In two families who had two siblings, in can 
be seen that the siblings stool community structures 
were much more closely related than they were to 
their sibling who was gastrostomy fed, e.g., Families 
B and G. This observation again highlights the 
impact of the feeding modality rather than the 
diet. The bacterial diversity was lower in both FD 
and BD diets, with a lower diversity seen in FD, but 
this was not significant. There is no clear explanation 
as to why they may have lower diversity, but it 
may be due to higher load of prescribed antibiotics 
that these children are taking with nearly 70% having 
them in the last 6 months. In the study of 
Gallagher and colleagues9 in which they intervened 
with a BD diet in FD fed cohort, there was a clear 
increase in the diversity of the stool microbiota over 
time on a BD diet. Minimal taxonomic data was 
provided, with a reduction of OTUs in the 
Proteobacteria, and an increase in OTUs from the 
Firmicutes being reported. There were also enrichments 
of two OTUs related to Eubacterium dolichum 
and a Lachnospira sp. which did not match 
ASVs there were different between Blended and 
Formulae in our study. However, it might be too 
difficult to reconcile the two cohorts due to 
a different geographical location, i.e., Canada and 
the interventional style of their study.

At a genus level, there were clear and significant 
differences between the levels of bacteria. Most 
notable was the much lower levels of bifidobacteria 
in the FD group when compared to the sibling 
group, and much higher levels of Anaerostipes. 
The Anaerostipes were also much higher in the FD 
compared to the BD and appear to be an enriched 
feature of the FD group. Modest changes were seen 

between the BD and sibling groups with enrichment 
of enterococci and depletion of ruminococci 
in the BD group. The depletion of the bifidobacteria 
is a point of concern as this genus is a very well- 
established probiotic, with documented roles in gut 
barrier function,31 atopic diseases,32 IBS,33,34 IBD35 
and several other non-communicable diseases.36 
Moreover, it has been tested as an intervention in 
a wide range of conditions, such as IBS, anxiety, 
NEC, and IBD36 and more recently in obesity37 and 
upper respiratory infections.38 Hence, any changes 
in the levels of this genus should be noted and 
a possible intervention with a probiotic, in this 
group, be considered for further investigation. 
The other notable genus which changed was 
Anaerostipes, this genus is a lactate and acetate 
utilizer, and produces butyrate as a by-product of 
cross-feeding,39–41 however, there was no increase 
in butyrate in the FD group (vide supra). A more 
modest change in the genus Eubacterium was also 
seen in the FD group, again this a recognized producer 
of butyrate.42 The most parsimonious explanation 
for an increase in these genera would be the 
reduction of bifidogenic components in the FD 
group’s diet, for example short-chain galacto- 
oligosaccharides and long-chain fructo- 
oligosaccharides,43 which provides an opportunity 
for both Anaerostipes and Eubacterium to flourish. 
From the questionnaire (data not shown) we did 
note that in both groups, the majority of children 
were not receiving any probiotics (BD 68.7% and 
FD 75%), which again may be an area for intervention 
in both groups. The FD may not contain these 
prebiotic elements which would be found in 
a blended diet that includes a more complex mixture 
of fiber such as inulin.8 However, both these 
genera are also known to feed on the lactate and 
acetate,44 and bifidobacteria produce these acids, 
but there was no significant reduction in the levels 
of lactate and acetate in the FD compared to the BD 
groups, which leads us to conclude that a loss of 
bifidobacteria does not impact the production of 
these acids. The enrichment of Anaerostipes and 
Eubacterium may indicate that these genera are 
competing with bifidobacteria for other resources 
and may not be cross-feeding on the lactate or 
acetate, e.g., glucose or fructose.44–47 The BD and 
FD also impacted the alpha diversity and total 
bacterial load in both these groups. Interesting, 
while not significant, the median values of diversity 
were higher in the BD compared to FD groups, 
while the trend in the bacterial load was in the 
opposite direction, with higher median value for 
the bacterial load in the FD compared to BD. 
These trends may reflect the nature and diversity 
of the diets being used but may also reflect other 
underlying issues with respect to disease and quantities 
of food being consumed, features which were 
not captured in this study.

Another aspect of the gut microbiota that we 
measured was the metabolic landscape of the fecal 
environment. Global profiles of the three different 
groups were not statistically different and showed 
that the BD and FD were not separating from each 
other in metabolic space, and we concluded from 
this analysis that the different diets were not translating 
into significantly different metabotypes. For 
the limited analysis of specific metabolites, viz short 
chain fatty acids, both the FD and BD showed 
significant reductions in concentrations of these 
important metabolites. These metabolites are 
important to the host in a wide range of physiological 
and immunological settings13 and any changes 
in the levels of these metabolites need to be considered 
for remedial intervention. For example, 
there are dietary products that can deliver propionate 
to the gut,48 which was depleted in both BD 
and FD groups, and should be considered in these 
cohorts of children ad supplements in their diet. 
Other options may again include probiotic supplements 
which may, with an appropriate prebiotic 
(aka a symbiotic), increase the levels of SCFA in 
the colon,49 while also addressing the low levels of 
“beneficial” bacterial such as the bifidobacteria. 
A more detailed and targeted profiling of the colonic 
metabonome would be valuable, for example 
bile acids and more SCFA, to assess the impact of 
the diet on this niche. Moreover, if we were able to 
obtain blood and urine, we would be able to explore 
the co-metabolic landscape in more detail, and map 
this to immunological data too, e.g. T cell types and 
abundance.

There were limitations to this study, which 
included the limited numbers in the study, the 
lack of a longitudinal aspect, more detail on the 
disease phenotypes and detailed data on the diet 
itself, its components and how much was consumed. 
We were also not able to collect dietary 

data to determine the children’s nutritional status 
or weight-for-age, which would be important 
aspects to collect for future studies. However, 
the study does, for the first time, show that 
a blended diet does not make a dramatic change 
to either the diversity of the colonic bacteria and 
the metabolic space therein, when compared to 
a formulae diet. In fact, we have shown that the 
FD group did significantly impact some groups of 
bacteria that would be beneficial to the host, i.e., 
bifidobacteria. Moreover, from this study, we can 
conclude that more needs to be undertaken to 
improve the diets for this group of children, and 
this may be in the form of addressing the fiber 
content and the use of probiotics, prebiotics or 
synbiotics.

Materials and methods

Cohort and ethics

This study was undertaken following approval by 
Southwest – Plymouth & Cornwall Research Ethics 
Committee (REF 17/SW/0049), and informed consent 
was obtained from all subjects, or their guardians, 
prior to sampling. Gastrostomy-fed children, 
fed with either a formula diet (n = 17) or a blended 
diet (n = 28), due to medical reasons, were recruited 
along with healthy siblings (n = 19) in a multi- 
center collaboration across five Health Boards in 
South Wales, led by Aneurin Bevan University 
Health Board. See supplementary methods for 
more details.

Sample preparation

The 66 frozen fecal samples were kept on ice, and 
frozen, and sub-sampled using a sterile 4 mm disposable 
biopsy punch (Kai Medical) to create 
a pellet, ~100 mg, which was dispensed into 
a sterile 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube and stored 
at -80°C until required for DNA extraction or 
metabonomics (Dr Laura Osborne pers. comm.).

DNA extraction from stool, quantification, and qPCR 
of 16S rRNA genes

Sub-sampled fecal punches were thawed on ice, and 
DNA extraction was carried out using the DNeasy 
PowerLyzer PowerSoil Kit (Qiagen, UK) with 
0.1 mm silica glass beads and following the protocol’s 
instructions with a few optimization steps for 
fecal samples, as follows. See supplementary methods 
for more details.

Metataxonomics of stool DNA

Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) of the hypervariable 
V1-V2 region of the 16S rRNA gene, using 
the Illumina MiSeq platform (Illumina Inc.), was 
performed in collaboration with the Genome 
Sequencing Hub at Cardiff University. See supplementary 
methods for more details.

Processing of stool metataxonomic data

The 16S rRNA gene sequencing data was processed 
using the DADA2 pipeline as amplicon sequence 
variants (ASV).50 The raw FASTQ files obtained 
from sequencing were unzipped and uploaded to 
a CLIMB server.51 See supplementary methods for 
more details.

Analysis of metataxonomic data

Statistical analysis was carried out using the 
STAMP statistical software to compare the taxonomic 
reads between the different test groups at 
different taxonomic levels,52 and ANOVA were 
performed to compare differences between all 
three diet groups with a Turkey-Kramer post hoc 
test set at a 95% confidence limit and with 
Benjamini-Hochberg FDR multiple test correction. 
White’s non-parametric two-sided t-tests 
were used to compare between two specific groups 
with bootstrapping set at a 95% confidence limit 
and Benjamini-Hochberg FDR multiple test correction. 
PCA plots of Hellinger transformed ASV 
data and PERMANOVA analysis of Weighted 
Unifrac distances were also created and tested in 
R using the packages BiodiversityR, vegan, and 
MASS. Alpha diversity indices were calculated 
using vegan in R on normalized data. Abundance 
counts of bacterial groups were determined by 
using the qPCR data to adjust the reads in each 
sample.53 Duplicate samples were not included in 
the statistical analysis here or for other tests outlined 
below, but one duplicate sample from child 


BD8 was included in the PCA plot to assess variation 
between duplicate stool samples (see 
Figure 2a).

Protease activity of cultured isolates

The fecal samples were prepared as an anaerobic 
slurry using 8% v/v DMSO in PBS and performed 
in an anaerobic chamber. Mixed bacteria in the 
fecal samples were grown anaerobically at 37°C on 
YCFA medium supplemented with lactose-free 
skimmed milk (LF-SM) to observe the protease 
activity.12 See supplementary methods for more 
details.

ß-Glucuronidase activity assay

ß-glucuronidase enzyme activity was measured, as 
previously described by Kim and Jin54 to for the 
fecal samples and to determine if there were differences 
between the three test groups. See supplementary 
methods for more details.

Statistical analysis for culture and enzyme activity

The differences between the three test groups were 
checked for statistical significance using a one-way 
ANOVA and a Tukey HSD test, which performs 
multiple comparisons of means, in R statistical software 
(R Core Team 2018).

Sample preparation for1H NMR spectroscopy

Sub-sampled fecal samples were thoroughly thawed 
at room temperature and weighed. Two portions of 
H2O were added to each fecal sample, vortexed for 
5 seconds and centrifuged at 14,000 g at 4°C for 
10 minutes. See supplementary methods for more 
details.

1H NMR spectral acquisition and experimental 
parameters

1H NMR spectra were obtained using a Bruker 
800 MHz spectrometer (Bruker, Rheinstetten, 
Germany), at a temperature of 300 K running 
a one dimensional (1D) standard experiment.

See supplementary methods for more details.

Spectral processing and metabolite identification

TOPSPIN 3.1 software (Bruker) was used for 
Fourier transformation, phasing and baseline correction. 
The TSP signal for each spectrum was 
visually assessed. See supplementary methods for 
more details.

Statistical analyses of NMR data

All multivariate statistical analyses, including 
Principal Components Analysis (PCA) and 
Orthogonal Partial Least Squares – Discriminant 
Analysis (OPLS-DA) were performed using 
MATLAB R2017a (MathWorks Inc., Natick, USA). 
R2Y (OPLS-DA) and R2X and Q2 (PCA and OPLS- 
DA) values were used to assess the robustness of the 
models. For univariate analyses, statistical significance 
was determined using Kruskal–Wallis test 
with Dunn’s multiple comparisons test. The level 
of significance was set at P < .05.

Quality of life questionnaire

A survey was developed to capture the views 
and experiences of children receiving a blended 
diet (group A; BD) and parents of children in 
receipt of a commercial formulae diet (group B; 
FD). See supplementary methods for more 
details and supplementary documents D1 and 
D2 for the two questionnaires used in this 
study.