INTRODUCTION 
Favipiravir (FPV) is an RNA‐dependent RNA polymerase inhibitor that acts on a broad spectrum of viral RNA polymerases. 1 It was originally developed for resistant influenza virus infections but is now being developed as a treatment for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS‐CoV‐2) infection disease, coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‐19). 2 , 3 Because of the unexpected rapid spread of the virus worldwide, which caused the COVID‐19 pandemic, FPV has been used for the treatment of COVID‐19; however, the pharmacokinetics (PK) of FPV in these populations are still largely unknown. 4 Therefore, PK studies of FPV in patients with COVID‐19 are needed to ensure its safety and efficiency in this patient population. We previously reported a case series of FPV PK in patients with severe COVID‐19. The concentration of FPV in seven patients who required invasive mechanistic ventilation (IMV) was much lower than that in healthy volunteers previously reported. The concentrations were also lower than the 50% effective concentration (EC50; 9.7 µg/mL) of FPV for SARS‐CoV‐2, and we reported that this was a great concern in the treatment. 5 Despite this, the factors affecting FPV PK in patients with COVID‐19 remain unclear. Thus, in the present study, we performed a population PK (PPK) analysis of FPV in patients with COVID‐19 to characterize the PK of FPV in this patient population. 
METHODS  
Study patients 
Patients with COVID‐19 administered FPV tablets (AVIGAN® tablet 200 mg; Toyama Chemical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) between March 19, 2020 and May 23, 2020, in Kobe City Medical Center General Hospital were enrolled in this retrospective observation study. Patient characteristics including age, sex, body weight (BW), height (HT), body surface area (BSA), body mass index (BMI), serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST), serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT), serum creatinine (SCr), comedications, and clinical status after starting FPV were investigated. Clinical status was evaluated using a seven‐category ordinal scale as follows: (1) nonhospitalization, no limitation of activities; (2) nonhospitalization, limitation of activities; (3) hospitalization, not requiring oxygen; (4) hospitalization, requiring oxygen by mask or nasal prongs; (5) hospitalization, requiring noninvasive ventilation and/or high‐flow oxygen; (6) hospitalization, requiring oxygen (invasive) and/or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; and (7) death. This study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the institutional ethics board (approval number, Zn200418; approval date, March 31, 2020). Informed consent was obtained from all study participants or their families. 
FPV administration 
In this retrospective study, patients were administered 1600 mg FPV twice daily (b.i.d.) on Day 1, followed by 600 mg b.i.d. from Day 2 to Day 5 (or more if needed, up to 14 days). Some patients who started FPV in another hospital and were then transferred to our hospital were administered 1800 mg b.i.d. on Day 1, followed by 800 mg b.i.d., and changed to 600 mg b.i.d. in our hospital. Patients on mechanical ventilation were administered suspensions of FPV tablets through a nasogastric tube. 
PK measurement 
This was a retrospective PK study using stored residual serum samples of routine clinical practice. All samples were obtained for clinical laboratory tests for general care, and residual serum samples stored at −20°C within 12 h after laboratory tests were used for PK measurement (stability was confirmed 5 , 6 ). All FPV dosages, dosing times, and blood sampling times were recorded. FPV serum concentration was determined using a validated liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry assay. The samples were measured using two calibration ranges (5–1000 and 500–100,000 ng/mL) to avoid carryover. The limit of quantification (LOQ) was 5 ng/ml. The assay precision (relative standard deviation percentage; n = 5) and accuracy (relative error percentage; n = 5) were 3.1%–7.4% and 97.1%–102.1%, respectively. 
PK analysis 
The nonlinear mixed effects modeling program NONMEM version 7.41 (ICON Development Solutions) was used to analyze the FPV PK data. The structure model was assumed to be a one‐compartment model with first‐order elimination because the peak‐time PK data were limited. PK parameters, clearance/bioavailability (CL/F), and distribution volume/F (V/F) were estimated by the first‐order conditional estimation method with interaction. The interindividual variability was described by proportional error model and included in CL/F as the following equation: θi=θTv×exp(ηi) where θi is the PK parameter estimate of individual i, θ tv is the typical value of the PK parameter, and ηi is the interindividual random effect of individual i with a mean of 0 and variance of ω 2. The proportional error model, additional error model, and combined error model were tested to describe residual errors using the following equation: Yobs,ij=Ypred,ij+εadd,ijadditional error model Yobs,ij=Ypred,ij(1+εprop,ij)proportional error model Yobs,ij=Ypred,ij⋅(1+εprop,ij)+εadd,ijcombined error model where Yobs,ij and Ypred,ij are the jth observation and prediction of the FPV concentration, respectively, for the ith individual, and εadd,ij and εprop,ij are the additive and proportional residual error with a mean of 0 and variance of σ 2, respectively. The base model was selected based on the likelihood ratio test (LRT) of change in the object function value (OFV). 
Covariate analysis 
Covariate analysis was conducted using a stepwise method based on the LRT to evaluate the factors influencing FPV PK. Potential covariates (age, sex, BW, HT, BSA, BMI, AST, ALT, SCr, comedications, clinical status, and FPV dosage) were added to the base model (forward inclusion criteria; p < 0.05). After a full covariate model was developed, each factor was removed in the backward elimination step (backward elimination criteria; p < 0.01). The following equation was used for categorical (0 or 1) and continuous covariate values, respectively: θi=θTv×θcovcovicategorical covariates θi=θTv×(covicovmedian)θcovcontinuous covariates where θi is the PK parameter estimate of the individual (i) and θtv is the typical PK parameter in the study population. θcov is the covariate coefficient, COVi is the individual (i) value of covariates, and COVmedian is the median value of continuous covariates in the study population. Clinical status and FPV dosage (as the last administered dosage at the time) changed over time, and these factors were incorporated as time‐varying covariates. The final model was determined according to the LRT and clinical relevance. 
Final model evaluation 
To identify potential bias due to the model structure, goodness‐of‐fit plots were generated. Population prediction (PRED) versus observation plots, individual prediction (IPRED) versus observation plots, conditional weighted residuals (CWRES) versus PRED plots, and CWRES versus time after first dose plots were visually assessed. A nonparametric bootstrap resampling method was used to evaluate the precision and robustness of the estimated PK parameters. A total of 1000 resamplings were run, and the medians and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were estimated. To evaluate the performance of the final PPK model, a prediction‐corrected visual predictive check (pcVPC) was performed. The 1000 data sets were replicated and simulated using the final model, and the distribution of the simulated concentrations was then graphically compared with that of the observations. Negative concentrations were truncated by LOQ. 
Simulation study 
PK simulation was performed 1000 times using the final model with σ fixed at 0. The PK of the following three types of regimens were simulated: 1600 mg b.i.d. followed by 600 mg b.i.d., 3200 mg b.i.d. followed by 1200 mg b.i.d., and 1600 mg b.i.d. Furthermore, a simulation using the published data of previous clinical studies 7 , 8 , 9 reporting FPV concentrations was performed. 
RESULTS 
Patient baseline characteristics 
A total of 39 patients were included in this observational study. All patients were diagnosed with COVID‐19 using real‐time polymerase chain reaction. Their baseline characteristics are summarized in Table 1. The median age was 68 years (range, 27–89 years), number of male patients was 31 (79.5%), and median BSA was 1.72 m2 (range, 1.14–2.2 m2). A total of 10 patients required IMV at the initiation of FPV (25.6%), and 7 patients (17.9%) had worn IMV after starting FPV. Two patients were weaned off IMV during FPV treatment. A total of 33 patients were administered 1600 mg b.i.d./600 mg b.i.d., and the others were administered 1800 mg b.i.d./800 mg or 600 mg b.i.d. PPK modeling Base model Among the 219 samples assessed, 204 FPV serum concentrations (median 5 points [range, 1–13] per patient) were used for the PPK analysis. Samples were obtained at 0‒6 h (11 points), 6.1‒12 h (125 points), 12.1‒24 h (30 points), and >24 h (38 points) from the last administration. A total of 15 samples (6.8%) below LOQ at 0‒6 h (2 points), 12.1‒24 h (2 points), and >24 h (11 points) were excluded as missing values. The PK data were fitted to a one‐compartment model with a first‐order elimination model. Among the tested residual error models, the combined residual error model had the smallest OFV and was thus selected as the base model (Table 2). As incorporation of interindividual error with V/F did not significantly reduce OFV (ΔOFV = −2.331, p = 0.127), an interindividual error was only considered for CL/F. 
PPK modeling 
Base model Among the 219 samples assessed, 204 FPV serum concentrations (median 5 points [range, 1–13] per patient) were used for the PPK analysis. Samples were obtained at 0‒6 h (11 points), 6.1‒12 h (125 points), 12.1‒24 h (30 points), and >24 h (38 points) from the last administration. A total of 15 samples (6.8%) below LOQ at 0‒6 h (2 points), 12.1‒24 h (2 points), and >24 h (11 points) were excluded as missing values. The PK data were fitted to a one‐compartment model with a first‐order elimination model. Among the tested residual error models, the combined residual error model had the smallest OFV and was thus selected as the base model (Table 2). As incorporation of interindividual error with V/F did not significantly reduce OFV (ΔOFV = −2.331, p = 0.127), an interindividual error was only considered for CL/F. FPV dosage was negatively correlated with CL/F, indicating dose‐dependent nonlinear PK. Patients who required IMV (clinical status = 7, IMV = 1) had a greater CL than those who did not (IMV = 0). BSA was positively correlated with CL/F. Model evaluation Goodness‐of‐fit plots with the final model are shown in Figure 1. Observations versus PRED or IPRED plots were symmetrically distributed around the diagonal line, indicating good model predictivity. No systematic bias was observed in the CWRES versus PRED or time after the first dose plots. Thus, no specifications on the structure model or residual model were found. The means and 95% CIs of the final PK parameters by the nonparametric bootstrap analysis are shown in Table 2. The success rate was 98.3%, and all median values were close to the model estimates and showed the robustness of the model PK parameters. The pcVPC showed that the observation value was in good agreement with the simulated concentration of the model (Figure 2). 
Simulation study 
Results of simulations using the final PPK model are shown in Figure 3. The mean and 5th–95th percentile values of the three types of regimens on IMV or non‐IMV and BSA = 1.72 or 2.20 (this was the median or upper value in the study population) are presented. The mean trough concentration of the 1600/600 mg b.i.d. regimen was lower than the EC50 reported in SARS‐CoV‐2 (9.7 µg/mL) 10 with any simulation; therefore, the regimen may be insufficient for the treatment of COVID‐19. In patients who required IMV, the mean trough concentration of the doublet regimen (3200/1200 mg b.i.d.) was also lower than the EC50, and that of the 1600 b.i.d. regimen only exceeded the EC50 in patients with median BSA = 1.72 and not in those with BSA = 2.20. In patients who did not require IMV, the mean trough concentration of the 1600 b.i.d. regimens only exceeded the EC50 in patients with BSA = 2.20. In addition, simulation results using the published data of previous clinical studies 7 , 8 , 9 are shown in Figures S1–S3. Although the simulation was based on some assumptions, the final model could adaptably describe the observations of previous studies. 
DISCUSSION 
In this study, we characterized the PK of FPV in patients with COVID‐19 using a PPK analysis. This is the first report of a PPK analysis of FPV in patients with COVID‐19. The FPV PK was adeptly described by the one‐compartment first‐order elimination model, and the PK parameters were comparable with those of the one‐compartment first‐order elimination model reported previously. 9 CL/F was significantly related to IMV use, FPV dosage, and BSA in the covariate analysis. Model validation results revealed that the final model had good precision and robustness. The simulation with the final model indicated that the 1600/600 mg b.i.d. regimen may be insufficient for the treatment of COVID‐19 targeting the EC50 (9.7 µg/mL), suggesting that a higher dosage is needed for treatment. The result that patients who required IMV had higher CL/F and exhibited low FPV concentrations was consistent with that of previous studies. PK case studies in patients with severe influenza virus infection 11 and COVID‐19 8 requiring IMV have been reported, and their FPV concentrations were lower than those reported in other previous studies. We have also reported seven patients who were critically ill with COVID‐19 treated with FPV. 5 Although the cause could not be specified, IMV was only significantly incorporated as a time‐varying covariate of CL/F and not a baseline status in the covariate analysis. This suggested that IMV‐related factors (such as biological changes or combination drugs) affected FPV metabolism or absorption. Patients with severe COVID‐19 require deep sedation to prevent lung injury, which might decrease drug absorption. Interestingly, the FPV dosage was negatively related to CL/F. The loading regimen was used for FPV treatment, and the CL/F after the administration of 1600 mg FPV was 0.55 (=1600/600−0.61)‐fold lower than that after the administration of 600 mg FPV. This resulted in a relatively high FPV concentration on the first day, which decreased thereafter. This was also reported in other studies in patients with Ebola virus disease 7 and severe influenza infection. 9 In both studies, the loading regimen was used, and patients showed unexpected drops of FPV concentrations. In a later study on severe influenza infection, a PPK analysis of FPV was conducted with time included as a covariate to explain the drop. 9 In the present study, we used FPV dosage as a covariate, as it may be able to explain the dose‐dependent autoinhibition of metabolic enzymes (aldehyde oxidases) 12 as reported in nonhuman primates. 12 Although this is not confirmative because we have not separately examined the administrated dosage, it may be useful as one of the possibilities of dosing design for the future development of FPV treatment. Dose‐dependent nonlinear PK is observed in many drugs, and it causes unexcepted overexposure and toxicity. 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 We conducted a simulation study of three potential regimens of COVID‐19, and among them, the 1600/600 mg b.i.d. regimen was likely to be insufficient for COVID‐19 treatment, and the 1600 mg b.i.d. regimen only exceeded the EC50 in patients with BSA = 2.20 and patients without IMV. This is an extrapolation simulation using the overdosage range of available PK data, and the PK of any high‐dose FPV regimen cannot actually be predicted from our data. However, treatment for COVID‐19 is still limited, and high‐dose FPV is worth considering as also indicated by other reports. 9 , 17 In a recently reported animal model of COVID‐19, FPV was suggested to have an antiviral effect at only relatively high plasma and lung concentrations in the model. 18 Intracellular metabolites (favipiravir‐ribofuranosyl‐5'‐triphosphate) of FPV were reported to be dose (concentrations)‐dependent. 19 Thus, low blood concentrations less than the EC50 of SARS‐CoV‐2 were not so promising in terms of the antiviral effect. However, they should be carefully tested by monitoring the PK of FPV to avoid overexposure. Finally, there were several limitations to this study. First, this was a retrospective observational study using sparse PK data; thus, interindividual variability of the absorption rate and V/F could not be estimated. In addition, a PPK model describing FPV metabolism (e.g., Michaelis‐Menten elimination) could not be constructed. A planned and detailed PK study is required for the accurate dosing design of FPV. Second, we did not discuss the efficiency of FPV against COVID‐19 because patients were receiving various drugs and had various symptoms; therefore, the antiviral effect of FPV could not be evaluated. Further studies are needed to examine the relationship between the PK variability and the pharmacodynamics of FPV. In conclusion, PPK analysis of FPV revealed that CL/F was significantly related to FPV dosage, IMV use, and BSA. The 1600/600 mg b.i.d. regimen seemed insufficient for the treatment of COVID‐19 targeting the EC50 (9.7 µg/mL), especially in patients with larger BSA and/or IMV. A higher FPV dosage is required for COVID‐19, but dose‐dependent nonlinear PK may cause an unexpected significant PK change and drug toxicity. Further studies are warranted to explore the optimal FPV regimen. 