INTRODUCTION 
Immune checkpoint inhibitors have been game‐changing drugs in several diseases with once poor prognoses, such as melanoma, head and neck cancer, kidney cancer, and lung cancer. Most immune checkpoint inhibitors interfere with the PD1/PD‐L1 axis, which is involved in the immune‐refractory nature of several tumors. Atezolizumab is a humanized IgG1 anti‐PD‐L1 approved for the treatment of breast cancer, small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and non‐small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Although the pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics (PKs/PDs) of immune checkpoint inhibitors remain elusive, plasma exposure levels associated with target engagement and efficacy have been already published first with anti‐CTLA4 ipilimumab, 1 then for nivolumab, 2 pembrolizumab, 3 and atezolizumab. 4 These thresholds have been used to perform in silico modeling for the transition from mg/kg dosing to flat dose with extended dosing intervals. 5 , 6 , 7 Since then, several reports have suggested that these flat‐dose regimens could result in plasma levels that greatly exceed the concentrations required to be pharmacologically active. 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 For instance, 6 μg/mL is usually considered as the plasma concentration of atezolizumab required to engage the PD‐L1 target, based on experimental PK/PD studies. 4 However, to date, no evidence of such overexposure has been demonstrated, although recent in silico studies have suggested that 1200 mg q6w could be an alternate scheduling ensuring trough levels above the target concentration. 8 Here, we present real‐world data on atezolizumab peak and trough levels in patients with SCLC and NSCLC treated with flat‐dosing regimens, with full modeling support to identify individual PK parameters and to determine the adequate dosing interval with respect to the 6 μg/mL threshold constraint.
PATIENTS AND METHODS 
Patients 
This was a retrospective, noninterventional, observational study conducted at the Department of Thoracic Oncology, University Hospital Nord, Marseille, France. The retrospective data collection and statistical analysis were approved by the Review Board (Cellule d'Evaluation at the Direction de la Recherche Clinique & de l'Innovation [DRCI], APHM) and followed the European recommendations regarding the Clinical Trials Regulation (EU) 536/20141 and the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR; EU) 2016/6792. This study was granted the French MR004 legal status for noninterventional studies and registered as such as #PADSS4XPQ3. 12 Routine clinical and biological data, including atezolizumab serum concentrations, were retrieved from our institution's database. Considering the noninterventional nature of this study, signed informed consent was waived by our institution review board. All the described procedures were in accordance with the ethical standards of the responsible committee (i.e., DRCI, APHM). Twenty‐seven patients (15 men and 12 women, mean age: 66 years, range: 44–80, mean body weight 63 kg, range: 39–84) were treated with standard atezolizumab (i.e., 1200 mg q3w) for NSCLC (12 patients), and SCLC (15 patients) as a single agent (6 patients), in combination with chemotherapy (20 patients) or in combination with another immune checkpoint inhibitor (1 patient). The World Health Organization (WHO) Performance status was 0 (13 patients) or 1 (14 patients). Patients were treated with atezolizumab as first line (17 patients), second line (9 patients), or third line (1 patient). Baseline characteristics of the patients are shown in Table 1. Patient care, treatments, and physical examinations or biological monitoring were all performed according to standard practice for patients with lung cancer. 13 , 14 Efficacy was assessed according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) version 1.1 criteria 6 weeks after the start of atezolizumab and every 2 months during the entire course of the treatment. Toxicities were monitored and graded according to Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 5. 
Atezolizumab assay and PK analysis 
Therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) for atezolizumab was performed as a routine practice with anticancer agents in our institute. The plasma concentration of atezolizumab was determined using a fully validated liquid‐chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) multiplex method for the measurement of mAbs, including immune checkpoint inhibitors, in plasma. Briefly, extraction was performed using a commercially available kit (Promise Proteomics) and, after overnight enzymatic digestion, specific peptides were quantified using a triple‐quadropole mass spectrometer (Waters). The method was fully validated according to International Organization for Standardization (ISO;‐15189) and European Medicines Agency/International Conference on Harmonization (EMA/ICH) guidelines for bioanalysis, with a limit of quantification of 2 μg/mL and a precision and accuracy of less than 15%. 15 All patients were sampled at peak (i.e., immediately after the end of infusion) and trough (i.e., immediately before the start of the next administration) levels. Individual atezolizumab concentrations were then incorporated into a population PK model to derive individual PK parameters using Bayesian estimate (Monolix 2023R1; Lixoft). We customized a model inspired by the time‐varying clearance model previously published by Marchand et al. 16 As this was a real‐world study, some of the covariates in the original Marchand model (i.e., baseline albumin levels, anti‐drug antibodies [ADAs], tumor burden) were not always available or reliably measured for all or some patients and were thus discarded from the final model. The retained covariates of our final model were sex on clearance (CL), on the central volume of distribution (V1) and on the peripheral volume (V2), and body weight on CL and V1. Time‐varying clearance is described by the formula: CL=CLinie−TmaxtγTγ50+tγ where CLini is the baseline clearance for a patient, T max is the maximum fractional change in clearance over the trial time course (t), and T50 is the time at which the change is half of its maximum, while γ is an exponential shape parameter. Individual PK profiles were simulated throughout time using the actual plasma concentrations measured, the PK parameters previously computed (Simulx 2023R1; Lixoft) and considering the number of successive administrations of atezolizumab for each patient. The model was evaluated based on visual inspection of goodness‐of‐fit plots, visual predictive check plots, and distribution plots. The data management was done using R language (version 4.3.0; R Project). The exposure‐response analyses were performed on the RECIST criterion and on the occurrence of reported toxicity (CTCAE grading), with the following parameters: clinical data (such as age, sex, smoking status, number of metastatic sites, histological type of tumor, line of treatment, combination of treatments or not, and neutrophil‐to‐lymphocytes ratio) and PK data either measured or calculated from simulations (such as minimum plasma concentration [C min], maximum plasma concentration [C max], area under the curve [AUC] at cycles 1 and 6, and baseline clearance). With respect to the small number of patients, a p value less than 0.05 was considered as statistically significant. Further multivariate analysis was performed when p less than 0.05 was reached upon univariate analysis. We used a logistic regression with the stepwise method of MedCalc V22. 007 (MedCalc Software Ltd). 
RESULTS 
Patients were treated with one up to 45 courses of atezolizumab. A total of 91 samples (40 trough levels, 51 C max) were collected (mean: 3.7 per patient, range: 1–8). Individual PK characteristics and exposure metrics are shown in Table 2. After the first dose, peak levels were 361.9 ± 8.9 μg/mL (median: 359.5 μg/mL, range: 357.7–404.4) and all patients had C min values above the target threshold (mean: 78.3 ± 17.4 μg/mL, median: 78.8 μg/mL, range: 39.7–134.8). Figure 1 shows typical atezolizumab concentration‐time profiles for each patient (Figure 1a) or as a population (Figure 1b) following the first dose of atezolizumab. The mean baseline clearance and terminal half‐life were 0.25 ± 0.04 L/day (median: 0.26 L/day) and 16.4 ± 3 days (median: 15.9 days), respectively. The mean AUC after the first treatment was 4982.8 ± 1023.1 μg.day/mL (median: 4615 μg.day/mL). The full PK profiles with experimental data during the successive courses for each patient are shown in Figure 2. Comparison among mean C max, C min, and CL values in our patients and values from previously published studies is displayed in Table S1. PK parameters for each patient and results of the simulations to determine the dosing interval to maintain a trough threshold of 6 μg/mL are shown in Table S2. Goodness‐of‐fit plots, PC‐visual predictive check (VPC) plots, and distribution plots are displayed in Figures [Link], [Link], and S3. The model‐guided dosing intervals ranged from 48.9 to 136.6 days (mean: 85.7 ± 15.6 days, median: 82.6 days), depending on the individual PK parameters. Figure 3 shows the comparative PK profiles (actual q3w schedule vs. model‐guided schedule) for two representative patients: patient #31 with the shortest recommended dosing interval of 48.9 days (Figure 3a) and patient #32 with the longest recommended dosing interval of 136.6 days (Figure 3b). Complete response (CR), partial response (PR), stable disease (SD), and progressive disease were observed in one (3.7%), 14 (51.8%), 10 (37%), and two (7.4%) patients, respectively. Of the 17 patients who received first‐line treatment, 13 patients (76.4%) had CR + PR and four patients had SD (23.5%). In the nine patients treated as second‐line, two patients (22.2%) had PR, six (66.6%) had SD, and one (11.1%) had progressive disease. The only patient treated with atezolizumab as a third line had progressive disease. Ten patients (37%) experienced mild atezolizumab‐related adverse events, mostly skin toxicity and thyroid toxicity (grade 1: 9 patients and grade 2: 1 patient). The testing of putative covariates associated with overall response is shown in Table 3. None of the exposure metrics (i.e., trough levels, peak levels, and AUC on cycle 1) or PK parameters (i.e., baseline clearance) were associated with efficacy (i.e., CR + PR). Similarly, none of the exposure or PK metrics simulated at cycle 6 were associated with efficacy (data not shown). First‐line atezolizumab treatment and treatment for NSCLC were both significantly associated with efficacy on univariate analysis (p = 0.0067 and p = 0.0497, respectively), but further stepwise multivariate analysis did not confirm this relationship (p = 0.2465 and p = 0.9981). None of the other covariates were associated with efficacy. Similarly, none of the exposure or PK metrics at cycle 1 or cycle 6 were associated with atezolizumab‐related adverse events (Table 4). Smoking status was moderately associated with toxicities on univariate analysis (p = 0.03), but this effect was not confirmed on further stepwise multivariate analysis (p = 0.99). Other covariates were not associated with atezolizumab‐related toxicities, irrespective of the treatment cycle (data not shown). 
DISCUSSION 
The search for predictive markers with immune checkpoint inhibitors is still ongoing. PD‐L1 levels, tumor mutational burden, neutrophil/lymphocyte ratio, and history of corticoids or antibiotics use have all been once proposed as putative markers with immunotherapy. 17 Although scarce, an increasing number of clinical reports suggest that PKs and exposure levels with immune checkpoint inhibitors may also help predict clinical outcome. Trough levels of ipilimumab have been associated with both survival and toxicity in patients with melanoma. 1 Similar exposure‐response relationships have been found with nivolumab in patients with NSCLC, 2 although other groups have not confirmed such an association. 18 For pembrolizumab, a recent study suggested that PK‐guided dosing may help improve progression‐free survival in patients with lung cancer. 19 Exposure levels associated with target engagement have been used to support the switch from mg/kg dosing to a fixed dose of atezolizumab. 5 However, several reports using in silico modeling have suggested that the current flat dosing may lead to overexposing patients compared to pharmacologically active levels. 8 Here, we monitored the plasma levels of atezolizumab in patients with NSCLC and SCLC treated with standard dosing. Individual PK parameters were estimated using a population approach with a simplified model. It should be noted that some of the covariates of the original model, 16 such as albumin level, ADAs, or tumor burden, could not be used because of uncertainties in the values reported in the medical records of our patients. However, their importance on the PK parameters was reported to be less than 20%, that is, in the usual range of the precision of the analytical methods used to measure plasma levels. The goodness‐of‐fit, PC‐VPC, and distribution plots suggested that this simplified model was able to fully capture the PK profiles of real patients. Furthermore, the estimated individual clearance values were in the range of the clearance values previously published by Marchand et al. 16 and Stroh et al. 20 Our results showed that despite interindividual variability in PK parameters and subsequent exposure levels, trough drug levels after the first dose were on average 12‐fold higher (range: 3.3–22.5 fold higher) than the 6 μg/mL threshold associated with PD‐L1 inhibition. 4 No relationship was found between plasma drug levels and response, most likely because all patients were above the target exposure. Notably, despite peak plasma concentrations sometimes up to 67 times higher than the recommended pharmacologically active levels, no relationship was found among peak, trough, or AUC levels and treatment‐related toxicities, suggesting that immune‐related adverse events with atezolizumab were not exposure dependent. Further simulations were performed to determine the individual time required to reach the 6 μg/mL threshold before re‐administering atezolizumab. Simulations suggest that the dosing interval could be extended from the standard 1200 mg q3w dosing up to 19.5 weeks (mean: 12.2 weeks, i.e., q12w), while maintaining drug concentrations above target plasma levels. This interval is significantly longer than in silico modeling by Peer et al., 8 who suggested that alternate atezolizumab dosing frequency could be 1200 mg q6w. This is probably due to differences in our respective modeling approaches and the fact that Peer et al. generated virtual patients in silico, whereas our present study is based on actual measurement of atezolizumab plasma levels in real‐world patients. Still, it should be noted that there are some caveats to using real‐world data because, unlike clinical trials, biological and medical data are not always reliable or available. Here, we had to use a simplified PK model because some covariates were not always available—however, the plasma concentrations for atezolizumab were correctly obtained as part of routine TDM in our institute using a validated mass spectrometry method, and using a population PK approach we were fully able to identify individual PK parameters of atezolizumab. We present, for the first time, routine TDM data for atezolizumab showing that patients are largely overexposed with respect to target plasma levels associated with target engagement. Further simulations suggest that dosing intervals could be significantly extended (mean: q12w, range: 48.9–136.6 days) without compromising the required exposure for target engagement (i.e., trough levels >6 μg/mL). The extent to which PK‐guided dosing could help reduce drug costs remains to be investigated, but several reports have already suggested that adjusting the dosing interval could lead to subsequent savings in terms of drug and hospitalization costs. 21 , 22 Prospective studies comparing standard and de‐escalated dosing with respect to PK and efficacy end points will be required to confirm whether the shift to extended dosing intervals can maintain drug levels above pharmacologically active concentrations. The MOIO study, an ongoing randomized, noninferiority phase III trial comparing standard dosing of immune checkpoint inhibitors including atezolizumab with q12w dosing, should confirm the hypothesis generated by our observations. 23 