Background 

Traditional, complementary and integrative medicine 
and therapies (TCIM) refers to different forms of health 
practices and products outside the mainstream orthodox 
medicine [1]. TCIM is also referred to as complementary 
and integrative health. It covers a broad spectrum of ancient 
and modern approaches that support the prevention 
or treatment of diseases [2]. It includes the use of 
traditional herbs, traditional and spiritual healing, and 
other medical practices [2]. TCIM is known to be the 
oldest form of healthcare practice available and it is 
found in almost every country around the world [3]. 

Globally, the interest in TCIM and its use has grown 
and it is being accepted by many people around the 
world [4]. The WHO reports that about 80% of people 
in developing countries such as China, India, Latin 
America and large parts of Africa are known to rely on 
TCIM as a source of primary health care [5]. In Ghana, 
TCIM was practised over the centuries, and by trial and 
error, the knowledge of traditional medicine has been 
acquired and adopted [6]. It is known to have existed 
hundreds of years before the colonial era [7]. 

Colonization and activities of the missionaries in the 
country led to the introduction of conventional medicine 
[8]. This led to the repression of TCIM services in 
Ghana. Conventional medicine was therefore recognized 
and institutionalized as the mainstream healthcare in the 
country. However, TCIM has still been recognized by 
governments over the years as an existing healthcare system 
with rising patronage and usage. 

About 70% of the population of Ghana depend on 
TCIM for their primary health care needs [9]. Ghana, 
therefore, implemented the WHO strategy of integrating 
TCIM into formal healthcare delivery system in September 
2012 [6]. In 2011, traditional medicine practice was 
introduced into the mainstream health care system in 11 
selected hospitals across the country. This strategy was 
to ensure that TCIM services are offered in a safe, respectful 
and effective manner according to the policies 
and regulations of the country [10, 11]. 

Studies have shown that sustainability and integration 
of TCIM depend on provider and client factors. These 
factors include financing, knowledge generation and 

management, capacity building, appropriate service delivery 
mechanisms, individual/community belief systems, 
and usage of TCIM [12–16]. This study assessed the 
usage and sustainability of integrating TCIM in a district 
hospital in Ghana from both the provider and patient 
perspectives. 

The conceptual framework of the study was based on 
usage by patients, leading to sustainability of the TCIM 
programme. Several patient factors affect the usage of 
TCIM services: general belief, perceived effectiveness, the 
availability and location which in turn creates demand. 
From the provider’s perspective, programme sustainability 
was assessed on its management and organizational issues, 
funding stability, organizational capacity, programme 
evaluation, political support, partnership and planning. 
These will ensure service availability and easy access to 
sustain TCIM services in the facility (Fig. 1). 

Methods 

Study setting 

The study was conducted at Ledzokuku Krowo Municipal 
Assembly (LEKMA), a newly created district in the 
Greater Accra Region of Ghana. The LEKMA hospital is 
the major public hospital in the Ledzokuku Krowo municipality, 
providing healthcare to the majority of the inhabitants. 
It was built through a collaboration between 
Ghanaian and Chinese Governments in 2010. Before its 
construction, there was no public facility in the municipality. 
It is a 100-bed capacity hospital with 9 departments 
namely: Out-Patients Department (OPD); Maternity 
(Ante-natal and family planning); Dental; Eye; Laboratory; 
Ear-Nose -and Throat; Radiology; Dermatology and 
TCIM departments. The orthodox component of the hospital 
currently has 18 medical doctors among whom are: 
eight specialists, six medical officers and four house officers. 
There are 95 nurses, and 110 health extension/auxiliary 
workers. The average daily OPD attendance is 200 
patients. 

The hospital was one of the first hospitals in Ghana 
that integrated TCIM formally known as complementary 
and alternative medicine into its routine primary healthcare 
in 2011. The TCIM department provides complementary 
and alternative medicine therapy services such 

Kenu et al. BMC Complementary Medicine and Therapies (2021) 21:14 Page 3 of 10 


Fig. 1 Conceptual framework of sustainability of traditional complementary and integrative medicines study 


as; herbal medicine services, acupuncture, massage and 
chiropractic. At the Out-Patient-Department, patients 
decide to visit the TCIM facility to receive TCIM service 
based on their preference. The department is under the 
central management of the hospital. It has three trained 
medical herbalists, a nurse, a dispensing technologist, 
and a massage therapist. The attendance record at the 
TCIM department at LEKMA from January to May 
2017 was 369 [17]. An average number of five patients 
visited the facility on a weekly basis. 

Study design and sampling technique 

We carried out a cross-sectional study using mixed 
methods (quantitative and qualitative data collection 
methods) for data collection. Patients accessing TCIM 
services and some service providers at LEKMA hospital 
from April to June 2017 were interviewed. 

Given the relatively small number of patients attending 
the TCIM clinic during the study period, all patients 
assessing TCIM services in the facility who consented to 
participate in the study were engaged in an exit interview. 
A total of 55 TCIM patients were interviewed. Five 
managers involved in TCIM services in the hospital were 
purposively selected and interviewed. These were: the 
medical director, nurse in-charge, and head of pharmacy, 
doctor-in-charge, and the pharmacy technologist at the 
TCIM department. 

All patients above 18 years who assessed TCIM services 
in LEKMA hospital were eligible for the study. 

Pre-testing 

Pretesting of the questionnaires were conducted at a Police 
Hospital in Accra. Police Hospital is among the hospitals 
that have recently also integrated herbal medicine 
into its healthcare system. The essence of the pretesting 

was to identify the appropriateness of the questions, to 
identify questions that needed adjustment before the 
main study. 

Data collection 

Data collection was conducted from April to June 2017. 
The data were collected by a trained field assistant. A 
structured questionnaire was used for the patient exit interviews 
to assess the use of TCIM. The questionnaire 
covered data on socio-demographic characteristics, 
questions under the following domains; general belief in 
the use of TCIM, perceived effectiveness of TCIM, types 
of TCIM services, availability of TCIM services, and location 
of TCIM services to assess the use of TCIM. For 
managers, both in-depth interview guides were used. We 
collected data on the sustainability of TCIM services in 
the hospital focusing on stability of funding, partnership, 
planning, organizational capacity, evaluation of the 
programme, and political support. The in-depth interview 
guide also covered the components of sustainability 
such as infrastructure, human resource, threats, and opportunities 
for improving TCIM services. Interviews 
were conducted in vacant consulting rooms or offices on 
the wards with no interruptions. To ensure that all details 
of responses were captured, permission was obtained 
for the digital audio recording of interviews to 
complement notetaking. These interviews lasted approximately 
30–45 min. 

Data entry and management 

Completed questionnaires were reviewed for completeness. 
To ensure reliable data entry, the data were double 
entered by two independent data entry clerks. Both en-
tries were then generated and checked to further ensure 
that all errors are corrected. The digital audio-recorded 

Kenu et al. BMC Complementary Medicine and Therapies (2021) 21:14 Page 4 of 10 

interviews were transcribed verbatim. Both quantitative 
and qualitative data sets were password-word protected. 

Definition of terms 

We defined TCIM usage as current use of TCIM services 
in the facility based on the patient’s general belief 
in it and their perspective of its effectiveness, availability 
and convenience of location. We defined sustainability 
as structures in place which enable TCIM services to 
run on its own with minimal support. 

Measurements and data analysis (statistics) 

Usage assessment 

Patient usage of TCIM was measured and analysed using 
a 5-point Likert scale to assess the set of statements in 
the domains of the general belief in the use of TCIM, 
perceived the effectiveness of TCIM, types of TCIM, location 
of TCIM and availability of TCIM services. We 
used 5 dimensions of rating for the domain statements: 
Strongly disagree = 1; Disagree = 2; Neutral = 3; Agree = 4 
and Strongly agree = 5. Each set of domain statements 
were rated. The responses and their respective scores for 
the 5 domain statements were determined for each patient. 
This was then used to describe the usage of TCIM 
services. Using descriptive tertile statistics, the total 
scores of TCIM usage were classified into 3 composite 
usage scores viz.: low (15–35); moderate (36–56); and 
high (57–75). 

Provider sustainability assessment 

Provider sustainability of TCIM services was measured 
and analysed using a 5-point Likert scale to assess the following 
domains: management and organizational issues, 
funding stability, organizational capacity, programme 
evaluation, political support, partnership, planning. The 5 
dimensions of rating the domain statements were: 
Strongly disagree = 1; Disagree = 2; Neutral = 3; Agree = 4, 
and Strongly agree = 5. These were then used to describe 
the sustainability of TCIM services. Using descriptive tertile 
statistics, the total scores of TCIM sustainability was 
then used to develop 3 composite TCIM sustainability 
scores namely: low (19–32), moderate (33–46), and high 
(47–57) sustainability. Furthermore, thematic content analysis 
was carried out to capture relevant themes and patterns 
relating to sustainability from the in-depth 
interviews with the aid of NVIVO 7 qualitative data 
analysis software. Thematic content analysis was used to 
identify the major themes. This gave us a deeper understanding 
of the use and usage of TCIM services in the 
facility. 

Ethical considerations 

Ethical approval for the study was granted by the Ghana 
Health Service Ethics Review Committee in March 2017 

(Protocol Number GHS-ERC: 125/02/17). Permission 
was sought from the Greater Accra Regional and District 
Directors of Health Services, and the management team 
of LEKMA Hospital. The purpose and scope of the study 
were explained to eligible patients. Only those who consented 
to take part in the study were interviewed. 

Results 

Background characteristics of mangers 

A total of 5 service managers were interviewed, 3 females 
and2males. Threeof themweredirectly involved in the 
day to day running of the herbal unit. Three had worked for 
more than 10 years and 2 had worked less than 10 years. 

Background characteristics of patients 

A total of 55 out of 60 patients participated in the study. 
The 55 patients were made up of 70.9% (39/55) females. 
The patients’ ages were between 18 to 85 years, with a 
mean age of 53.9 years (SD: 15.6 years). Table 1 shows 
the demographic characteristics of patients in the exit 
interview. 

Usage of traditional, complementary and integrative 
medicine (TCIM) 

About 73% (40/55) of responding patients indicated high 
usage of TCIM whilst the remaining 27.2% indicated low 
usage. Patients believed that the more knowledge one 
has on TCIM the more likely one will use it. About 76% 
(42/55) of patients agreed that the location of TCIM services 
influenced their decision to use the service. Concerning 
the perceived effectiveness of TCIM, 61.8% (34/ 

55) of patients agreed that TCIM is more effective than 
orthodox medicine for the treatment of their condition. 
On the usage of TCIM, 85.5% (47/55) of patients indicated 
that they will recommend TCIM to their friends 
and family (Table 2). 
Mangers’ perspectives of sustainability of TCIM services 

Four (4) of the five (5) responding managers indicated 
that sustainability in the hospital was partial (Fig. 2). 
Managers supported their assertion of partial sustainability 
of TCIM with the following observations. 

“It’s in its growing stages. It’s quite new in Ghana. 
Before, TCIM used to be only for foreigners who 
have come in but now locals are getting to know 
TCIM and it’s beginning to spread. In the past, if 
you wanted TCIM services, probably you will need 
to go to a Chinese clinic or some foreigner’splace. 
But now we are finding them in even private 
clinics owned by Ghanaians.”(Respondent 2) 

“Currently, what we are doing is just one part of 

TCIM, and not the whole service just because people 


Kenu et al. BMC Complementary Medicine and Therapies (2021) 21:14 Page 5 of 10 

Table 1 Demographic characteristics of patients accessing TCIM 
unit of LEKMA Hospital, 2017 

Variable Number (%) 
Age 
< 29 5 (9.1) 
30–49 14 (25.5) 
50–69 27 (49.1) 
= 70 9 (16.3) 
Sex 
Male 16 (29.1) 
Female 39 (70.9) 
Educational level 
Primary 7 (12.7) 
Secondary 27 (49.1) 
Tertiary 11 (20.0) 
Non-formal 10 (18.2) 
Marital status 
Married 28 (50.9) 
Not married 27 (49.1) 
Religion 
Christian 45 (81.8) 
Muslim 7 (12.7) 
Others 3 (5.5) 
Ethnic group 
Ga 23 (41.8) 
Akan 15 (27.3) 
Ewe 11 (20.0) 
Dagbon 6 (10.9) 
Occupation 
Trader 13 (23.6) 
Artisan 12 (21.8) 
Professional 10 (18.2) 
Unemployed 20 (36.4) 
Total 55 (100.00) 

do not like the medications, the herbal part seems to 
be dying, whiles the massage and other… the acupuncture 
seems to be growing. But if we are looking 
for a holistic service, all these services must go together.” 
(Respondent 1) 

Managers’ assessment of TCIM sustainability was on 
funding, organizational capacity, programme evaluation, 
political support, partnership and planning. Underfunding; 
managers said the TCIM budget was part of the 
LEKMA hospital budget but inadequate. All the managers 
agreed that salaries were paid by the government. 

However, TCIM has not gotten sustained funding from 
the government to date. 
On the issue of the current state of TCIM in LEKMA, 
a manager indicated that: 

“The present, it is not good. We have a lot to do. The 
past was better because we were distributing flyers, 
we were talking to patients, we were making announcements 
downstairs for people to know of the 
herbal services upstairs, we were talking to the doctors 
so they can refer patients to us. But such things 
have ceased because the microphone over there is 
spoilt” (Respondent 3) 

On the issue of infrastructure to sustain the service, 
the responses were that there were not enough to sus-
tain the service: 

“When LEKMA was built, there was a whole sector 
for the herbal division, the Chinese wanted to do a 
lot because they wanted to bring in some machines 
and other equipment, but before long, the rooms 
were given out. Now we have just two single rooms. 
The infrastructure is not enough. We still need 
rooms for so many things.” (Respondent 3). 

“Personally, everything we are using is donated. So, 
when the donations stop coming in then, it will become 
a bit difficult”. (Respondent 2) 

They all mentioned that to sustain, they need to improve 
on the service 

“Okay, so there is this issue of low client turn over 
because people are not even aware this service is 
available, sometimes it seems like we are not being 
very useful”. (Respondent 2) 

‘I said earlier on a lot more could be done… we are 
not supposed to advertise too’ (Respondent 3) 

Whereas four managers agreed that TCIM’sintegration 
into the operations of the hospital was little, the fifth manager 
asserted that TCIM had been integrated to a large extent. 
Only one manager thought there was no organizational 
system in place to support its various needs. 

Of the five (5) managers, three (3) were of the view 
that there was evidence showing the useful services the 
unit was providing and that the services of the unit were 
being monitored. All managers agreed that the unit submitted 
regular reports. 

Human resources was an issue on the sustainability of 
the services. The managers thought that this too was a 
limitation to service provision … 


Kenu et al. BMC Complementary Medicine and Therapies (2021) 21:14 Page 6 of 10 

Table 2 Patient’s views on factors that promote TCIM usage, LEKMA hospital, 2017 

Client issues Disagree (%) Neutral (%) Agree (%) 
General Belief in the use of TCIM 
Knowledge in the use of TCIM 3 (5.4) 9 (16.4) 43 (78.2) 
More potent than orthodox medicine 5 (9.1) 14 (25.5) 36 (65.5) 
Can be dangerous 8 (9.6) 6 (10.9) 41 (74.6) 
Last resort 19 (34.5) 8 (14.6) 28 (50.9) 
Location of TCIM 
Location influences decision 9 (16.4) 4 (7.3) 42 (76.4) 
More people will use if located in a health facility 3 (5.5) 2 (3.6) 50 (90.9) 
Visible directional signs 15 (27.3) 6 (10.9) 34 (61.9) 
Perceived effectiveness 
More effective 6 (10.9) 15 (27.3) 34 (61.8) 
Decide before coming 7 (12.7) 1 (1.8) 47 (85.4) 
Availability of TCIM services 
Readily available 8 (14.5) 13 (23.6) 34 (61.8) 
Waiting time 5 (9.1) 10 (18.2) 40 (72.7) 
Cost is cheaper 23 (41.8) 17 (30.9) 15 (27.3) 
Included in NHIS 2 (3.6) 3 (5.5) 50 (90.9) 
TCIM service is easier 15 (27.3) 14 (25.5) 26 (47.3) 
Perceived effectiveness Definitely no Not sure Definitely yes 
Recommendation of TCIM to family and friends 4 (7.2) 4 (7.23) 47 (85.5) 


Fig. 2 Composite scores of usage and sustainability of traditional, complementary and integrative medicine, LEKMA hospital, 2017 


Kenu et al. BMC Complementary Medicine and Therapies (2021) 21:14 Page 7 of 10 

“Some personnel are not permanent. So, they just 
come in for a specific time and then they have to go 
away. If this continues, it will not be something we 
can sustain” (Respondent 2). 

The doctor in charge remarked that: “the TCIM services 
are currently sustained by the Chinese support, 
should they withdraw this support at any time, 
the system is very likely to collapse” 

They also mentioned that a staff is currently being 
trained in China. 

“One of our ladies is currently in China, learning 
something different from what she was trained to do, 
she is a herbalist, but now learning acupuncture, this 
is also to help with sustainability” (Respondent 1) 

The main threats to sustainability pointed was the 
shortage of drugs and lack of variety of drugs at the 
pharmacy. 

“There is a list of herbal medicines that government 
has put in place. Those are the approved drugs that 
we are to use. We can only use drugs from Mampong. 
That is one of the problems. Sustainability 
means that we should stock a variety of drugs at all 
times “ (Herbal Technologist) 

“ Sometimes we do run short of some of the vital 
drugs at the pharmacy, because of the way they are 
purchased”. (Respondent 5) 

“In my opinion, like the private pharmacy, we should 
also have the essential drugs in stock every time, so 
clients do not have to leave the hospital to go and 
purchase drugs from outside” (Respondent 5) 

All the patients agreed that Ghana Health Service garners 
resources for TCIM services. Three (3) out of the 
five (5) managers agreed that the unit had political support 
from local authorities. Secondly, 3 out of 5 of mangers 
also said Ghana Health Services advocates for 
TCIM services. 

Two out of five managers agreed that TCIM had public 
support to a little extent and community and stakeholder 
support to a large extent. Three out of five 
managers were also of the view that local leaders such as 
community leaders should be engaged in the development 
of TCIM goals to some extent. 

Only one manager was of the view that the LEKMA 
Health Directorate was to a large extent involved with 
plans of TCIM operation and expansion; although three 
of the managers said the plans of the unit were 

integrated into the main plan of the hospital to a large 
extent and run solely by the hospital. 

Another respondent said the slow effect of herbal 
treatment is a threat which could discourage clients if 
the service providers are not confident enough to convince 
them of its effectiveness. Also, there is a problem 
with low client usage, they all mentioned the lack of advertisement 
as a threat to the service. 

“People want the accuracy of what you are giving to 

them, they want to make sure it will work, herbal is 

slow but it’s very effective.” (Respondent 3) 

‘Ghana Health Service does not permit us to adver


tise, so how are they helping people to know what 

we do?” (Respondent 3) 

“If we were able to advertise, ‘YES’ that will be a 

great opportunity.” (Respondent 2) 

Discussion 

We assessed the usage and sustainability of these services 
at LEKMA hospital, a public facility at the district 
level. From the clients’ perspective, the high usage of 
TCIM among users of TCIM at LEKMA indicated that 
it was sustainable. However, from the health service providers’ 
perspective, it was partially sustainable. 

From this study 75% of the patients indicated high 
usage of TCIM. This result was similar to findings by 
James et, al. which indicated that utilization of TCIM in 
recent years has grown dramatically [18]. Previous studies 
indicated that high usage of TCIM is linked with its 
low cost, accessibility and affordability [2, 16]. 

On general belief, the majority of the patients believed 
that TCIM was more potent than orthodox medicine 
and that it was able to treat their condition better than 
orthodox medicine. Findings from this work support an 
earlier work by Gyasi and his colleagues who reported 
that people believe TCIM was potent, powerful, and very 
useful in the treatment of various ailments [13]. Other 
people find the use of TCIM to be physiologically comfortable 
because they believe this system of health was 
embedded in their socio-cultural traditions [13]. About 
half of patients believe that TCIM should be used as a 
last resort and this corroborates findings by Verhoef and 
colleagues, in their study which indicated that TCIM 
can be used as a last resort and finding hope [19]. 

This study found several factors that influence people’s 
decision to use TCIM, these are the availability of visible 
directional signs to direct people and the fact that TCIM 
was located in the health facility. This may be explained 
by the fact that once it was located within the premise 
of the health facility it means it has been recognized as 

Kenu et al. BMC Complementary Medicine and Therapies (2021) 21:14 Page 8 of 10 

part of the health system and users may feel comfortable 
that their activities will be regulated. 

Patients who responded to the study perceive TCIM 
to be very effective for the treatment of their conditions. 
A study in Ghana on perceptions and use of TCIM 
among pregnant women in Ghana also recorded positive 
perceptions on the effectiveness of the use of TCIM 
[20].. A study in the Caribbean revealed that traditional 
medicines were perceived to be more efficacious in some 
instances or as equally effective as orthodox medicines 
[21]. This assertion was similar to the findings in this 
study. Earlier work done in the Ashanti region found 
that clients perceived traditional medicine to be effective. 
This was supported by their experiences of healing from 
conditions such as hypertension, boils, broken bones/ 
fractures, impotency and infertility etc. Some even believed 
as far as these diseases were concerned, it was 
more effective than conventional medicine [13]. A study 
by Muftawu, on integration in the same hospital, observed 
that herbal medicine was in high demand due to 
the increase in chronic non-communicable diseases [22]. 

The availability of medications and logistics such as 
wards, improved drug list and more personnel for treatment 
largely influence the use of TCIM whereas the absence 
of the logistics invariably means even those who 
depend on TCIM fully will not be able to use it. The 
availability of these needed logistics to effective use of 
TCIM cannot be over-emphasized. This was also linked 
to the sustainability of TCIM services. 

The study revealed that complementary and alternative 
medicine at LEKMA hospital was partially sustainable 
because of the inadequate human and material 
resources. A critical assessment of the components of 
sustainability clearly shows that there was the need to 
pay much attention to the availability of human resource, 
availability of requisite infrastructure, adequate 
funding, organizational capacity, programme evaluation, 
political support and partnership. In addition, funding of 
TCIM was under threat since there was little or no sustained 
funding from the government. Ensuring that 
TCIM services are absorbed by the national health insurance 
scheme (NHIS) should be considered. The unavailability 
of government resources for the acquisition 
of laboratory equipment to conduct further experiments 
and the cultivate medicinal plants to improve existing 
herbal products in the country and to come up with safe, 
effective and quality herbal products weakens this arm 
of service delivery [23]. With available old laboratories 
and facilities, institutions such as LEKMA should take 
advantage and rehabilitate them and use them to help 
improve traditional medicine development in the country. 
KNUST trains traditional medicine practitioners 
with formal knowledge of medicinal plants. These graduates 
apply scientifically-harnessed herbal medicines for 

the treatment of diagnosed diseases using locally available 
resources [24]. Again, the Traditional Medicine 
Practice Council contribute to building the capacity of 
its members by rolling out a series of capacity building 
training and continuous professional development programmes 
[24]. Managers commended the human resource 
capacity the Chinese government contribute 
towards running of the clinic. 

The organizational system described by the managers 
falls short of what Essegbey & Awuni, defined as an important 
first step in the integration of traditional medicine 
into the healthcare system of the country which 
includes oversight responsibility from Traditional and 
Alternate Medicines Directorate that was set up under 
the Ministry of Health [25]. The addition of some herbal 
medicines to the Essential Drug List and ensuring some 
traditional medicine treatments are covered by the NHIS 
have all not been implemented. 

There was demonstrable evidence of the usefulness of 
the TCIM according to the managers. In addition to 
some level of monitoring of the services, there was a 
regular report generated on service provision. Documentation 
of service provision is only worth the effort if it is 
disseminated to the wider community to inform, educate, 
and produce desirable attitudes towards regulated 
TCIM use as practised in LEKMA and other accredited 
service centres. 

The policy support for the integration of TCIM services 
into the mainstream healthcare system may be described 
as waning because logistics needed to conduct advocacy 
for TCIM has been dwindling over the years. Per the policy 
of GHS, advertisement on TCIM is not expected but 
there is the need to showcase the range of TCIM services 
being provided alongside the orthodox. Besides, the frequent 
shortage of drugs, non-availability of variety of 
products threatens the sustainability of TCIM. 

Government of Ghana partnership with the Chinese 
Government has yielded a lot of benefits including the 
infrastructure for TCIM treatment, regular support with 
equipment and human resource. Local leaders’ engagement 
has been ongoing but their presence is not felt beyond 
period of durbars. However, they have been 
instrumental in providing the peaceful environment for 
TCIM operations at LEKMA. 

It was evident that the plans of the unit have been partially 
integrated into the main plans of the hospital. It 
was the same managers who oversee both the orthodox 
and TCIM facility and they ensure its functionality. 

From our assessment, the high preference for usage 
depicts the willingness of patients to assess TCIM services 
if they are made available in government facilities. 
However, the structures in place may currently not be 
able to sustain the service. There is therefore the need 
for government and other stakeholders to revisit the 

Kenu et al. BMC Complementary Medicine and Therapies (2021) 21:14 

existing structures to create an enabling environment to 
ensure that TCIM services provided in the facility are 
fully sustainable. 

This study was an assessment of the feasibility of 
TCIM services into convectional medicine settings carried 
out for policy decisions. Therefore, it a basic descriptive 
approach with simple statistics was used for 
easy understanding. However, since LEKMA is the first 
and main Ghana Health Service facility which offers this 
service, the TCIM service of the hospital is a reflection 
of TCIM in public health services in Ghana. Again, conventional 
healthcare providers and managers of other 
conventional medicine departments were not interviewed 
about TCIM sustainability and use in the facility. 

Conclusion 

Among the users of TCIM, the assessment of TCIM at 
LEKMA hospital revealed a high preference for usage of 
TCIM from clients’ perspective and partially sustainability 
from health service providers’ perspective. Usage of 
TCIM from clients’ perspective indicated that sustainability 
was due to their high general belief in the potency, 
knowledge in its use and serve as a last resort 
when all else fail. Other factors that positively influence 
the high usage of TCIM among the users include the 
location, perceived effectiveness and availability. Unfortunately, 
the study showed that the current state of 
affairs for TCIM at LEKMA may not be sustained from 
the service provider’s perspective. TCIM services can be 
sustained at LEKMA provided Government of Ghana 
through Ministry of Health and the Ghana Health service, 
ensures availability of staff, advocacy of the service 
to be covered by the National Health Insurance and education 
and awareness creation on the TCIM service in 
the hospital. We would like to recommend that further 
studies in the sustainability of TCIM services from the 
perspective of all service providers and other patients 
assessing other services in the facility carried out. This 
would help give a better insight into TCIM usage.