INTRODUCTION 
Older patients (defined as 65 years and older) make up a rapidly growing, 1 heterogeneous population covering a wide span of general health and frailty. 2 The proportion of older people presenting to Swedish emergency departments (EDs) is approximately 40%. 3 The prevalence of frailty in this population has not been reported in Sweden, though international research describes a median prevalence of 47%. 4 The condition of frailty is described as a decline in several inter‐related physiological systems, in addition to an increased vulnerability to stressors. 5 It may occur at any stage throughout the adult lifespan but is most prevalent among the elderly. 6 , 7 , 8 Frailty has been shown to be predictive of an increased risk of mortality, hospitalization, falls, and admission to long‐term care. 5 Elderly individuals may therefore benefit from different management and interventions even if they are of the same chronological age based on their frailty. 9 Thus, identifying signs of frailty is an important task for ED health care providers, since it may affect the understanding of disease presentation and the risk of adverse events. 10 Identification of frailty may also be used to trigger measures such as comprehensive geriatric assessment 9 , 11 ; and various interventions or start the ED discharge planning in a timely manner. 12 , 13 Although qualitative assessment by “clinical judgment” is a common way to identify frailty, 4 , 14 , 15 several assessment tools have been proposed to assist in the identification of frailty. Van Damme et al. 16 identified 67 unique frailty assessment tools, and a number of these are currently in use in an ED setting. 4 , 9 The Clinical Frailty Scale (CFS) is one of the most widely used tools 4 , 10 and has been evaluated for validity and reliability in several studies in hospitalized patients. 10 CFS comprises a judgment based 9‐point scale (1–9) that was originally developed within the Canadian Study of Health and Aging. 17 CFS has been validated for persons ≥65 years of age and is made up of pictograms combined with clinical descriptions to help assign scores based on the assessment of a person's functional level in daily life and cognitive status. 18 Higher scores mean higher degree of frailty, with CFS score ≥5 as the most common cutoff used to describe a person as frail 10 Due to its rapid deployment, simplicity, 9 , 19 and accuracy in predicting poor outcomes, 10 , 19 CFS has been recommended for use in the ED. The CFS has been appraised for inter‐rater reliability in various settings with good results. 20 , 21 , 22 In EDs, there has been limited evaluation of inter‐rater reliability, with results defined as good, 23 , 24 , 25 yet only one study included assessments made by regular ED professionals during the course of clinical work. 25 Due to the fast pace in the ED, 26 there are limited opportunities to acquire extensive information regarding patients' past history. Since reliability is not a fixed quality of assessment tools, but rather a product of interactions between the tool, the subjects/objects, and the context of the assessment, 27 it is important to evaluate inter‐rater reliability in situations as close to reality as possible. Only few studies have evaluated inter‐rater reliability of the CFS in an ED setting and none in a Scandinavian context. Previous studies on inter‐rater reliability of CFS in EDs include physicians, registered nurses, advanced practice providers (e.g. physician assistants/nurse practitioners), and research personnel. 23 , 24 , 25 Swedish emergency care organizations typically involve physicians (either emergency physicians or interns/residents from the specialties internal medicine, surgery, or orthopedics), registered nurses, and assistant nurses, all with varying experience. 28 We therefore wanted to evaluate the inter‐rater reliability of CFS in such a setting. Hence, the aim of this study was to evaluate the inter‐rater reliability of the CFS in a real‐life Swedish ED setting, comparing assessments made by the physician, registered nurse, and assistant nurse in charge of the assessed patient. This study addressed the following research questions: (1) what is the level of inter‐rater reliability of CFS when used in an ED? (2) Are there differences in measures for inter‐rater reliability between emergency care teams with emergency physicians in relation to emergency care teams with interns/residents from other specialties? (3) Does the inter‐rater reliability vary with the degree of frailty (CFS 1–9)? and (4) What is the intra‐rater agreement between clinical judgment (frail/not frail) and frailty assessed by CFS (dichotomized by cutoff CFS of ≤4 meaning not frail and CFS ≥ 5 meaning frail)?
METHODS 
Study design and setting 
This was a prospective observational, multicenter study carried out in three Swedish EDs. The study was approved by the Swedish Ethical Review Authority (permit 2021‐00875) and registered on ClinicalTrials.gov (identifier NCT04869878). Table 1 summarizes the data collection periods and characteristics of the three participating EDs: one university hospital (UH), which also is the regional trauma center and one of few EDs in Sweden run by emergency physicians, one community hospital ED (CH 1), and one rural community hospital ED (CH 2). All staff were encouraged to participate in an e‐learning course in the use of CFS. The content of the course was based on the content provided in the online training module developed by AIMS research group of Ottawa Hospital, Canada. 29 Three clinical vignettes were included along with the basic theoretical concept of frailty and its consequences for the patients' health and functional aspects. Among ED staff, the completion rate for the e‐learning course was 77%. Physicians employed elsewhere were not asked to complete the course but may still have performed it as the education was open to everyone in the organization. 
Selection of participants 
Sample size was set according to guidelines for sample size determination for analysis with the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC). 30 With three assessments per patient, 90% power and α = 0.05, the minimum sample required for the study was 83 subjects. Allowing for some attrition, we decided to include 100 patients, resulting in a total of 300 assessments. Inclusion criteria were as follows: age ≥ 65 years (for patients), and the health care professionals (HCPs) were required to be part of an emergency care team. Exclusion criteria for HCPs was unwillingness to provide informed consent. Data collection was performed in triplicate (physician, registered nurse, and assistant nurse) and the distribution of shifts for data collection was planned according to the well‐known diurnal pattern of ED patient visits throughout the day. 31 The data collection thus took place on day shifts (two‐fifths), evening shifts (two‐fifths), and night shifts (one‐fifth). Individual work shifts for data collection were selected using the online application Research Randomizer. 32 The staff was thereafter included by convenience sampling in each shift. A researcher was present during each data collection shift to inform about the study, obtain informed consent, identify newly arrived elderly patients, and organize the assessments. In general, the researcher approached every emergency care team (consisting of a physician, registered nurse, and assistant nurse) where a patient ≥65 years had recently arrived and where no CFS point had yet been assigned or discussed. Written informed consent was obtained from all participating HCPs. 
Methods of measurements 
A worksheet (available as supplemental material accompanying the online article) was used to fill in the assessments and demographic information of participant and patient. Information regarding patient's age and sex and HCPs age, sex, and years in profession were collected. Additionally, physicians' primary specialties (emergency physicians or interns/residents from other specialties) were recorded. We used the Swedish version of CFS (CFS‐9), 33 with the addition of pictograms from the original version. 34 Frail patients were defined as those with a CFS score of ≥5. Each HCP independently assessed each patient, generating three individual assessments per patient. First, the assessor was asked to decide whether the patient was frail or not based solely on individual clinical judgment. There was no predetermined definition of frailty provided to the assessors. The patient was then assessed using the CFS. The professionals had access to standard clinical information (e.g., patient, relative/caregiver and notes from the medical records). Like in standard clinical situations they were also allowed to discuss details regarding the actual patient within the team, although discussing the CFS score or estimated frailty was not permitted until all team members had set their score. 
Outcomes 
The primary outcome was (1) the inter‐rater reliability of frailty assessed by CFS, expressed as the ICC. Secondary outcomes included: (2) difference in ICC between care teams with emergency physicians and care teams with interns/residents from other specialties; (3) comparison of degree of frailty (CFS 1–9) and agreement between CFS scores, by plotting the assessed CFS point of each HCP for each patient; and (4) intra‐rater agreement between clinical judgment (frail/not frail) and frailty assessed by CFS (dichotomized by cutoff CFS ≤ 4 meaning not frail and CFS ≥ 5 meaning frail), expressed in percentages. 
Data analysis 
Descriptive statistics are reported as median and interquartile range (IQR) for continuous variables and as number and percentage (%) for categorical variables. To determine the inter‐rater reliability, considering the nine CFS points as ordinal data, we used ICC (95% confidence intervals [CIs]), a commonly used reliability index for this type of scale, which takes rank ordering into account. 35 , 36 ICC estimates were based on a single measurement, one‐way random‐effects model. 37 We interpreted ICC as follows: <0.5 = poor, 0.5–0.75 = moderate, 0.75–0.90 = good, and >0.90 = excellent. 37 Intra‐rater agreement between assessments solely by clinical judgment versus by CFS was calculated by using cross‐tabulation. All statistical analysis was done in IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, version 27. 
RESULTS 
A total of 100 complete sets of CFS assessments (one assessment each made by the physician, registered nurse, and assistant nurse) were included. Assessment of six additional patients was started but not finished due to missing assessment from at least one profession and two because of unintentional exposure of CFS points within the team. For three of the patients, there were missing assessments of frailty according to clinical judgment, which is why such data were collected for 97 patients (Figure 1). Each HCP team assessed between one and five patients each during the period for data collection. Characteristics of the participants are shown in Table 2. The 100 sets of assessments were made by a total of 144 HCPs, 54 physicians participated, of whom almost half (48%) were emergency physicians. The physicians had the lowest median age. The assistant nurses had most years in their profession whereas physicians had the least. Most participating professionals were women, with physicians being the only group not exceeding 50%. The 100 patients had a median (IQR) age of 77 (11), 53% were women, and the patients´ median (IQR) estimated CFS was 4 (4). The overall ICC was 0.78 (95% CI 0.72–0.84; Table 3) indicating a moderate to good level of reliability. In comparison of ICC between the care teams including an emergency physician versus a team with an intern/resident from another specialty, they both had results considered as moderate to good (Table 3). The ICC for teams with an emergency physician was 0.74 (95% CI 0.62–0.83) and for teams with an intern/resident from another specialty 0.83 (95% CI 0.74–0.89). Both groups performed an equal amount of assessments. When examining inter‐rater agreement in relation to the patients´ degree of frailty, the spread of scores shows a similar pattern in the low and mid part of the scale, while there is a tendency for less spread at CFS 7–8 (Figure 2). Absolute agreement for all HCPs within a team was seen in 17 out of 100 assessments. A difference of one point between the assessments within the team was most common (n = 46). In pairwise comparison (between physicians, registered nurses, and assistant nurses within the teams) physicians and registered nurses had the highest (n = 46) absolute agreement (Figure 2). Clinical judgment of frailty status by each HCP (frail/not frail) was compared to their CFS assessment. The agreement was 84% both for registered nurses and for assistant nurses and 86% for physicians. In the opposing cases, all professional groups tended to assess patients as frail to a higher extent by using clinical judgment, than by applying the CFS on the same patient (Table S4). 
DISCUSSION 
In this prospective multicenter study, we measured inter‐rater reliability of the CFS by physicians, registered nurses, and assistant nurses in their daily clinical work in the ED. We found a moderate to good level of inter‐rater reliability, regardless of whether the care team included an emergency physician or an intern/resident from another specialty. We identified disagreement of 2 points or more within the teams (between the three different HCPs) in a third of the patients. A “good” level of inter‐rater reliability has previously been shown in an ED context, both by Kaeppeli et al. 24 and Ringer et al. 25 However, Kaepelli et al. assigned a dedicated research group for assessments, whereas Ringer et al. examined inter‐rater reliability with regular ED staff. An inter‐rater reliability of “almost perfect” was seen in the study by Lo et al. 23 who compared scores between registered nurses in clinical work to those made by an emergency physician with geriatric expertise. The reported differences in variation between assessors, as described both in this study and in previous reports, led to a new set of questions: What degree of disagreement is acceptable? Should discrepancies be seen as a need for further assessments or change in mode/frequency of training the staff? How can we make optimal use of an instrument that does not have “excellent/perfect” inter‐rater reliability? These questions need to be considered when organizing the way to use the tool and its resulting scores. For instance, one could hypothesize that some management pathways could be implemented for patients considered as frail but not for individuals assessed as not frail (CFS ≤ 4). If the CFS scale is used to dichotomize patients as frail/nonfrail accordingly, a difference of 1 point on the scale could potentially result in very different management. However, estimating the significance of differences in CFS scores between assessors is challenging, as the evidence base for different interventions for frail ED patients is weak in general 38 and lacking in relation to different CFS scores. Further, our results indicate that inter‐rater reliability for CFS may be higher when the patients are very frail, as there is less spread of points among those patients compared to the lower scores. A wider spread in the middle of the scale was also previously seen in a study in intensive care units. 21 The explanation for this might be that it is more difficult to assess the degree of help needed if the patient manages somewhat independently. To facilitate these difficulties, Theou et al. 39 developed a classification tree where questions are asked based on the descriptions of each of the CFS levels. Such a model would likely assist ED HCPs and thereby result in improved inter‐rater reliability of CFS in an ED setting. Another possible explanation for the higher agreement of CFS scores for the very frail could be that the views of relatives/caregivers are requested to a higher extent. Flaatten et al. 21 showed that requesting relatives´/caregivers´ information was beneficial for the inter‐rater reliability of CFS, and thus it seems helpful to obtain information from both patients and relatives when appropriate. Furthermore, the fact that team members assign different CFS scores may be due to them having gathered somewhat different information about the patient. Such discrepancies could be addressed by a team dialogue when identifying individuals being at risk of adverse events due to frailty. There was an overall 84% agreement when we measured the intra‐rater agreement of frailty according to clinical judgment versus by CFS. This supports the result of Elliott et al. 15 in which the participants assessed case vignettes, first by clinical judgment and then by using different frailty assessment tools, including CFS. Intra‐rater agreement in their study was 83%, but the distribution of opposing assessments was not reported. In this study, patients were more frequently considered to be frail based on clinical judgment compared to assessment by CFS. Although, we do not know which of the methods was the most accurate, the finding is interesting since previous research has found ED CFS assessments to be lower compared to those made in the ward at hospital admission. 40 Considering this, our result raises the idea that clinical judgment may be more sensitive in identifying frail individuals in the ED than CFS. Priority of an instrument's sensitivity or specificity should depend on the reason for deploying frailty assessment, and the differences between CFS and clinical judgment highlighted by this study may provide some guidance in choosing between the methods. Regarding which assessment method is most accurate (clinical assessment or CFS), there is currently no stated criterion standard measure for frailty to compare against. 16 , 41 The most advisable course of action to investigate the relevance of clinical judgment regarding frailty in older ED patients would therefore be to explore it in relation to the same outcome measures as for standardized frailty assessment tools (e.g., mortality, length of stay, hospitalization, ED revisits). Further knowledge gained by such studies would help establish, in more detail, how clinical judgment differs from assessments made by standardized tools and thereby delineate its possible place in clinical frailty assessment.
LIMITATIONS 
There are several limitations of this study. The extent of completed e‐learning course probably differed among physicians since interns/residents from other specialties were not asked to complete the course; this could have affected the results. While 77% of the ED staff completed the course, a larger proportion could have resulted in better inter‐rater reliability. However, this is likely to be a realistic picture of the day‐to‐day situation in any ED, where coordination of training for all staff is a well‐known challenge. Another major limitation was that we did not use an additional assessment made by an expert (e.g., a geriatrician) as a reference to identify which of the HCPs CFS scores was the most accurate. Although shifts were randomized, the teams were selected by a research member and therefore selection bias is plausible. Finally, since the HCPs were aware that they should assess the patient by both clinical judgment and CFS, confirmation bias could have affected the scoring in either direction. 
CONCLUSION 
The Clinical Frailty Scale has moderate to good inter‐rater reliability between physicians, registered nurses, and assistant nurses, when used in a real‐life setting in an ED for the assessment of patients ≥65 years. Inter‐rater reliability was also moderate to good regardless of whether the team included an emergency physician or an intern/resident from another specialty. This study indicates that ED HCPs more often assess patients as frail according to their individual clinical judgment than when applying CFS on the same patient. Further research needs to be performed on the accuracy of clinical judgment to identify older ED patients with risk for adverse events due to frailty. 