INTRODUCTION 
It is estimated that 10% of the Veteran population aged ≥ 65 years has some form of dementia, and this number is expected to increase by 22% in the next decade.1 The emergency department (ED) is an essential care setting for persons living with dementia (PLWDs), with about 40% of community-dwelling PLWDs making at least one ED visit per year and 30% hospitalized at least once.2 Overall, PLWDs have significantly more acute care utilization compared to their counterparts without dementia—they have almost twice as many ED visits, more ED revisits, more costly ED visits, more frequent hospitalizations, and longer inpatient stays.3–7 Unfortunately, optimal methods to either reduce or improve quality of acute care for PLWDs have not been identified.2,8,9 There are some promising outpatient programs in the Veteran Affairs Health Care System (VAHCS), such as the “Partner in Dementia Care” care coordination program,10 which was noted to be one of only two interventions with a statistically significant reduction in hospitalizations in a recent systematic review of ambulatory dementia care models.11 To facilitate effective emergency care for PLWDs by improving appropriate acute care use, reducing avoidable use, and improving outcomes, we need to better understand why PLWDs seek care in the ED. While encounter diagnosis codes are often used to categorize the reason for an ED visit for administrative or research purposes, they are limited in many ways—they are assigned from the physician perspective after the completion of the ED visit, different physicians may assign different codes, or they may be assigned by administrative coders.12,13 Presenting symptoms or chief complaints provide a promising, alternative method that directly captures the patient’s perspective. However, the use of chief complaints to understand ED care patterns for PLWDs requires additional nuance, as older adults often have atypical presentations of illnesses, and cognitive impairment may cause barriers in communicating patient history leading to the ED visit.14 Additionally, collateral information reported by a caregiver may be needed, or the reason for the ED visit may differ between the patient and their caregiver.15 There has been little prior work investigating ED chief complaints for PLWDs with large-scale studies.16 More often, reasons for ED visits among PLWDs have been compared to patients without dementia in large quantitative studies based on encounter diagnosis4,17 or have been investigated with smaller qualitative interview studies of PLWDs and caregivers.18,19 There are no known national studies of standardized ED chief complaints among PLWDs. Using chief complaints to find differences in their reasons for ED visits may identify opportunities that warrant targeted interventions. The VAHCS is an optimal environment to better understand reasons for acute care use among PLWDs and improve the quality of their ED care. There has been a significant commitment by the Department of Veteran Affairs (VA) to enhance geriatric-focused care in the ED setting, with the goal of expanding formal geriatric ED accreditation to all 111 VA EDs.20–22 With such significant resource allocation toward geriatric ED care, it is essential to better understand areas where PLWDs may differ from those without dementia, to determine where they may need specialized attention or care compared to other geriatric patients, and to design targeted dementia-specific interventions. To fill this knowledge gap, this study using a novel national ED chief complaint data set investigates how ED utilization for older Veterans with dementia compares to those with no dementia diagnosis. We compare: (1) patient population characteristics, (2) ED visit characteristics, (3) common presenting chief complaints, and (4) associated encounter diagnoses. 
METHODS 
Study design and setting 
This was a retrospective observational study of ED encounters within the VAHCS in Fiscal Years (FYs) 2017–2018. The VAHCS represents the single largest integrated health system in the United States, with 111 EDs. This study was approved by the Stanford University Institutional Review Board and approved by the VA Palo Alto Research & Development Committee. 
Data sources 
Administrative data were retrieved from the VA Corporate Data Warehouse.23 Study sample characteristics including age, gender, race, ethnicity, VA priority group, residential location, marital status, housing, and Elixhauser scores were collected. We identified all VA ED encounters; associated dispositions (discharge, admission, or death in the ED); Emergency Severity Index (ESI) scores (stratifying patients into five triage levels based on patient acuity and resources needed at arrival, with 1 at highest acuity)24; and encounter diagnoses. ED encounter diagnoses were defined by the primary International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems, Tenth Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-10-CM) code assigned to the encounter. Emergency care–sensitive conditions, conditions for which timely access to high-quality emergency care impact morbidity and mortality (e.g. stroke, sepsis), were defined using previously established methods.25 
Study cohort 
The study sample included all living VA users 65 years or older as of the start of FY2017. ED users were defined as VA users who had at least one VA ED visit in FYs 2017–2018. Our dementia cohort included those with a diagnosis of dementia, defined as one or more ICD-10-CM dementia or mild cognitive impairment (MCI) diagnosis recorded in any VA inpatient or outpatient setting in FYs 2016–2017. This cohort definition was based on the dates of initial implementation of ICD-10-CM codes in the VA and methods for lookback periods used in a previous study of VA patients with dementia.3 ICD-10-CM diagnoses are based on dementia codes identified by the VA Office Geriatrics and Extended Care and MCI codes endorsed by the American Academy of Neurology (Table S1).26,27 All patients without a dementia or MCI diagnosis were assigned as a comparison “nondementia” cohort. 
Chief complaint data set
A natural language processing (NLP) program developed by the VA Informatics and Computing Infrastructure (VINCI) group was applied to the original text of VA ED chief complaints as recorded in the Emergency Department Integration Software (EDIS) program.28 This NLP program was based on the clinical Text Analysis and Knowledge Extraction System (cTAKES), an Apache open source project.29 Each of the text-based chief complaints were mapped to Concept Unique Identifiers in the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) Metathesaurus.30 A single chief complaint text entry for an ED visit could result in no assigned concepts, one assigned concept, or multiple assigned concepts. The NLP system has been validated on 500 distinct chief complaint statements to perform mapping with approximately 91.4% precision and 83.4% recall in identifying mentioned concepts and their context.31 
Outcomes 
The primary outcome was presence of one or more VA ED visits in FYs 2017–2018. Secondary outcomes included counts of ED visits by disposition, ESI score, chief complaint (defined by Concept Unique Identifier), and encounter diagnosis (defined by ICD-10-CM code). 
Analytic methods 
Sociodemographic characteristics are described using summary statistics, and those for ED users in the dementia and nondementia cohorts are compared with standardized mean differences.32 Continuous variables are presented as mean and standard deviation (SD) as appropriate. We examined the likelihood of an ED visit for the overall study cohort, using a logistic regression model controlling for dementia, age, sex, race, VA priority group, and comorbidity. Variables were selected as basic demographics and those noted to be significant when compared among ED users via standardized mean differences. Comorbidities were assessed using the Elixhauser Comorbidity Index, which is constructed based on ICD codes for 31 comorbid conditions and used to predict mortality risks, hospital resource use, and other adverse events.33 For this analysis, we used any inpatient or outpatient ICD-CM-10 diagnosis code in FY2017. We also removed any ICD code used to define our dementia cohort from the “other neurological disorders” Elixhauser condition category to not bias the dementia cohort with higher Elixhauser scores, consistent with other studies of ED use in dementia populations.5 A total of 422 patients were excluded from the model due to missing data. For all documented ED visits, we report counts and proportions of dispositions, ESI levels, chief complaints, and encounter diagnoses for both the dementia cohort and their counterparts without dementia. Differences in admission rates at each ESI level were examined using chi-square tests using the first visit for each patient in the study period to account for multiple patient visits. A sensitivity analysis was performed using all ED visits. For all analyses, significance was set at p < 0.05. All analyses were conducted in R version 4.1.2. 
RESULTS 
Our study sample of all Veteran users 65 years old or older comprised 3,115,263 patients. Of those, 255,372 (8.2%) had a diagnosis of dementia, and 2,859,891 (91.8%) had no diagnosis of dementia. 
ED user characteristics 
Demographic and clinical characteristics for both ED users and non-users are presented in Table 1. Among ED users, demographic and clinical characteristics of these Veteran groups demonstrated similar majorities of male (97.5% dementia and nondementia cohorts), White (73.5% dementia vs. 75.7% nondementia), urban dwelling (74.0 vs. 67.5%), and married (51.0% vs. 52.3%) patients. The dementia cohort was older with a mean (±SD) age of 77.8 (±8.7) years, compared to mean age of the nondementia cohort at 72.7 (±6.9) years. The dementia cohort additionally had a greater mean Elixhauser Comorbidity Index (5.12 vs. 3.71) and had more patients in VA priority groups associated with high disability (50.6% vs. 40.4%). 
ED utilization and disposition 
Results of the logistic regression model examining the presence of an ED visit in the study period are presented in Table 2. After controlling for age, sex, race, VA priority group, and comorbidity, patients with dementia were significantly more likely to have an ED visit during the study period (odds ratio 1.96, 95% confidence interval 1.94–1.98, p < 0.001.) Patients in the dementia cohort made 314,219 VA ED visits in our 2-year sample period, and those without dementia made 1,538,963 ED visits. Among those who were ED users, the dementia cohort had a mean (±SD) of 3.4 (±3.8) visits/person and the nondementia cohort had a mean (±SD) of 2.7 (±2.9) visits/person over the study period. For all ED visits in our study period by Veterans with dementia, 35.3% of visits resulted in admission, 64.7% were discharged, and 0.05% died during their ED encounter. For all ED visits for those with no dementia diagnosis, 23.7% were admitted, 76.3% were discharged, and 0.03% died during the ED encounter (please refer to Table 3 for ED encounter characteristics, including total counts of visits by ESIs and by emergent encounter diagnosis). 
ED utilization by ESI 
We examined differences in admission rates using the first ED visit for each patient by ESI level, please refer to Table 4. For all ESI levels except for level 1 (highest acuity), patients in the total dementia cohort were admitted at significantly higher rates than their nondementia counterparts. When further comparing admission rates for age groups (65–74, 75–84, ≥85) within each ESI level, patients in the dementia cohort were consistently admitted at higher rates. A sensitivity analysis for differences in admission rates inclusive of all ED visits demonstrated similar results (Table S2). 
Chief complaints 
ED users with a diagnosis of dementia had a total of 422,421 concepts assigned across 314,219 visits, and those with no diagnosis of dementia had 2,136,600 concepts assigned across 1,538,963 visits. Approximately 8.0% of ED visits by ED users with dementia had no assigned chief complaint concept (7.4% in the nondementia group), and 35.4% of the ED visits in the dementia cohort had two or more concepts assigned (37.2% nondementia). Detailed presentation of ED visits by number of assigned concepts is provided in Table S3. The 10 most frequent chief complaints for each group are reported in Table 5. The most common chief complaints associated with ED visits by dementia patients were falls (assigned to 6.7% of ED visits), dyspnea (6.0%), chest pain (4.6%), weakness (3.6%), and coughing (3.0%). For those without dementia, top chief complaints were dyspnea (7.3%), chest pain (4.9%), coughing (4.2%), falls (3.3%), and pain (2.8%). Chief complaints that were more common among ED visits by patients with dementia included falls (6.7% dementia vs. 3.3% without dementia), weakness (3.6% vs. 2.2%), and abnormal mental state (2.2% vs. 0.4%).
Encounter diagnoses 
We identified ICD-10-CM encounter diagnoses associated with ED visits for each of the 10 most common chief complaints, provided in Supplemental Table S4. For ED visits with a chief complaint of “falls,” many of the commonly assigned encounter diagnoses were most consistent with mechanical falls or trauma, but we note other common encounter diagnoses included R55 Syncope and collapse and R53.1 Weakness in both those with and those without dementia, as well as R41.82 Altered mental status, unspecified for the dementia cohort. For ED visits with a chief complaint of “weakness,” encounter diagnoses were associated with a variety of codes in both groups including various infectious etiologies, R53.1 Weakness, E86.0 Dehydration, and R42 Dizziness and giddiness. Among those with dementia, ICD-10-CM diagnoses of R41.82 Altered mental status, unspecified and R62.7 Adult failure to thrive were also common. While the chief complaint of “abnormal mental state” was notably more common in those with dementia, the most common associated ICD-10-CM encounter diagnoses included R41.82 Altered mental status, unspecified, a number of infection-related diagnoses, and encounter diagnoses directly related to dementia such as F03.91 Unspecified dementia with behavioral disturbance.
DISCUSSION 
Consistent with prior studies of community-based ED utilization, in this retrospective observational study of Veterans 65 years or older who visited a VA ED in FYs 2017 and 2018, we found that Veterans with dementia were more likely to have an ED visit even after controlling for factors such as age, comorbidity, and priority score. They were also admitted at higher rates for all ESI levels, except with similar rates for visits at the highest acuity. While the dementia cohort had an older mean age (which might account for higher acuity and admission rates), we also note that when comparing these ED users by age categories, the dementia cohort was still consistently admitted at higher rates. This may suggest that Veteran PLWDs are undertriaged at all but the most discernably acute levels or that PLWDs are admitted at higher rates for reasons independent of their age or acuity. To our knowledge, these findings are the first to examine and compare VA ED utilization among older Veterans with and without dementia and support the need to develop tailored ED-based interventions for PLWDs in the VA setting. When examining chief complaint data using a novel NLP derived national data set, we found that Veterans with dementia had largely similar chief complaints compared to their nondementia counterparts, but with slightly higher rates of ED visits for chief complaints associated with certain geriatric syndromes like falls and certain non-specific complaints like weakness and altered mental state. These findings are congruent with a prior study conducted in a smaller population of Medicare beneficiaries in two health systems comparing ED visits before and after a diagnosis of dementia.16 While there is no standardized definition of nonspecific complaints, they are generally considered to be presentations that do not suggest an ED evaluation based on any particular organ system or infectious etiology—essentially, they are defined by the lack of a specific complaint.34 We note that for other nonspecific complaints such as dizziness or pain, rates among the two groups appear similar or have even higher rates in the nondementia cohort. When examining associated encounter diagnoses assigned to these common chief complaints, we found they were largely similar between the two groups but spanned a wide range of clinical conditions within each chief complaint category (e.g., the chief complaint of falls could be associated with traumatic or medical etiologies based on encounter diagnosis). Chief complaints have important potential applications in improving the quality of care for older adults. One large category of possible use is in risk assessment and prediction- identifying older adults at higher probability of adverse outcomes including hospitalizations, repeat ED visits, and subsequent morbidity and mortality. Early promising work has demonstrated the use of chief complaints in risk prediction tools for ED admissions35,36 and adverse hospitalization outcomes,37 although this work has not focused on geriatric populations or PLWDs specifically. Prior work to specifically identify high-risk geriatric ED users has taken a number of other approaches. The use of risk screening in geriatric EDs has rapidly increased within both the VA and the community, including screens for frailty and social vulnerabilities.22,38 As another approach to risk stratification, prior work using latent class analysis has identified subgroups of geriatric ED users at risk for frequent ED use, suggesting that these individuals would benefit from targeted interventions.39,40 Enhancing these approaches with chief complaint data may be a good way to increase the predictive power of these screens to identify patients at the highest risk of high ED use or adverse outcomes. Additionally, using combinations of presenting symptoms or chief complaints may additionally help providers better understand risk of adverse events and guide ED workup.41 However, if we find that dementia populations do not have a difference in risk with any given chief complaint, this may also help identify presentations that do not necessarily warrant a targeted intervention, which would still allow for better allocation of resources as well as easier implementation and dissemination of interventions that are able to be appropriately inclusive of multiple subgroups. In any case, our results suggest that the use of chief complaint data for certain geriatric syndromes and nonspecific complaints may serve as good avenues for further exploration in risk prediction models and intervention development. Chief complaints are also a promising source of data for the future development of ED quality performance measures, which have important implications for both quality improvement efforts and reimbursement policies. Currently, there are a number of quality performance measures based on specific ED diagnoses, such as time to cardiac catheterization for a ST-elevation myocardial infarction. However, since risk stratification and the diagnostic process is such a significant part of the ED’s function, quality measures based on presenting symptoms may better capture key aspects of the quality of this function of emergency care.12 In recognition of this need, the National Quality Forum developed guidelines for advancing chief complaint–based quality measure development and made a set of recommendations for chief complaint vocabulary standardization and for development and implementation of chief complaint-based measures.13 Using chief complaints, we found that PLWDs had higher rates of visits for falls and certain nonspecific complaints such as weakness and altered mental state compared to their nondementia counterparts. The greater rate of presentations for falls among dementia patients may be due to both cognitive impairment as a risk factor for falls (even independent of age) and a differential impact of fall screening and fall prevention strategies among this population. Of note, while falls in patients with dementia are certainly related to age-associated declines in motor function, they are also less able to compensate for these changes with executive cognitive functions such as sensory integration, judgment, and planning. As such, ED interventions for falls in patients with dementia may need additional components to address these issues, separate from age-related mobility issues in the general older adult population.42,43 Weakness is a common example of a nonspecific complaint, which are among the most challenging presentations for ED physicians because by nature, they do not have standard diagnostic protocols and are more difficult to accurately triage, risk stratify, and diagnose.44,45 This is consistent with our findings demonstrating the wide variety of encounter diagnoses associated with the most common chief complaints. Consequentially, the time and resources needed to evaluate patients presenting for nonspecific complaints is often beyond the capabilities of the ED, with over 50% being misdiagnosed at discharge.46 PLWDs are at particular risk of misdiagnosis given their increased difficulties with communicating accurate histories to further guide ED workup in the setting of these vague complaints. As such, our data suggest that presentations of falls and nonspecific complaints among PLWDs may be good targets for further exploratory work and targeted interventions to improve quality of ED care. However, in the case of nonspecific complaints, since not all of them appear to be more frequent among those with dementia, this will likely require interim work on better definition and identification for chief complaint standardization. Current standards (including this study as exploratory work with a novel data set) largely use physician review to distinguish nonspecific from specific complaints.46,47
LIMITATIONS 
We recognize several limitations in this study. Our cohort of Veteran PLWDs was defined by those with a dementia diagnosis in VA records, and we may have missed Veterans who have used a VA ED but receive all of their outpatient care in community settings. However, we believe the number of Veterans who fit this community care pattern is small. Additionally, our study relies on recorded administrative codes to establish a dementia diagnosis. We elected to use a 2-year lookback period to define the cohort based on when ICD-10 codes were implemented in the VA, which means we may have missed patients if they were only assigned a dementia diagnosis prior to FY2016 or after the lookback period. It is possible that undercoding of dementia or failure to diagnose may mean that some patients in our control group may have had dementia but were not yet diagnosed as such. Also, because non-VA data were not available for the NLP-derived chief complaint data, we did not include non-VA ED visits by Veterans, and as such there may be differences in presenting symptoms to VA and non-VA ED settings. There are constraints associated with the use of this chief complaint data that may limit its generalizability. As discussed above, there is no universal standardized vocabulary for ED chief complaints. However, the method used to generate chief complaint concepts in this research is based on the Unified Medical Language System and thus should be replicable. We also acknowledge that the NLP method based on cTAKES is one of many possible approaches to analyze free text, and other NLP algorithms may generate different results. Additionally, over a third of ED visits were associated with multiple chief complaint concepts, which largely limits its use for inferential analysis to complex machine learning models in the current form.41 One of our next steps is to identify other methodologically rigorous ways to examine visits with multiple concepts. Similarly, many ED visits were not assigned a chief compliant concept through this NLP procedure. Ongoing work to improve context detection and reduce mapping errors of the current data set is under way. We hope that these changes will improve utility in multiple applications.
CONCLUSIONS 
Our results reinforce that the ED is a common access point for Veterans with dementia. This work represents the first application of a novel natural language processing–standardized ED chief complaint data set, which is, to our knowledge, the largest in the country and representative of a diverse patient population (i.e., by age, region, rurality). Results demonstrated that Veteran persons living with dementia present with different chief complaints in comparison to their counterparts without dementia, and specific targets for further interventions to improve quality of ED care may include visits for falls and other nonspecific complaints like weakness. As chief complaint data are incorporated into risk prediction tools and ED performance quality measures, further work should be done to understand how persons living with dementia require special consideration among older adults. This work is particularly urgent given the growing population of Veteran persons living with dementia and the rapid expansion of accredited geriatric EDs across the Veterans Affairs Health Care System. 