1. Introduction
The dosing recommendations of non-depolarising neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBAs) are generally based on the patient’s total body weight (TBW). However, the pharmacology of NMBAs differs in patients with various body composition characteristics because the recommended drug doses are derived from average populations. Although ideal body weight or corrected body weight has been used in dosing NMBAs, especially for morbidly obese patients [1], [2], anaesthesiologists may find it difficult to determine an appropriate dose and predict the effect of the administered drugs, even in non-obese populations. Even if height and weight are similar, patients can have different morphologies and compositions of body components [3].

Rocuronium is an intermediate-acting steroidal NMBA, which is soluble in water and highly ionised [4]. Non-depolarising NMBAs manifest muscle relaxation effects by binding acetylcholine (ACh) receptors in a competitive inhibitory manner with ACh at the neuromuscular junction. When administered, NMBAs occupy the majority of the post-synaptic ACh receptors, and end-plate depolarisation is inhibited by preventing the influx of sodium ions. Consequently, the skeletal muscles are relaxed. If the concentration of ACh again increases enough to occupy the Ach receptors at the neuromuscular junction, recovery from neuromuscular block will occur. However, these time courses of neuromuscular block by NMBAs are variable among individuals, and the associated factors are multifactorial but not clearly determined [5]. Although TBW is generally used for dosing NMBAs in clinical practice, the amount of skeletal muscle may be considered important for determining the drug doses.

This prospective study aimed to investigate the effects of body composition on the rocuronium-induced neuromuscular block. We hypothesised that body composition, including skeletal muscle mass, affects the pharmacologic effect of rocuronium. The time course of the neuromuscular relaxation effect of rocuronium was compared according to patient body composition characteristics.

2. Materials and methods
2.1. Study participants
This prospective study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Jeonbuk National University Hospital (IRB number: CUH 2019-08-015) and registered with the WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (KCT0004412). This manuscript adheres to the applicable STROBE guidelines. After obtaining informed consent, a total of 101 patients, aged 18–65 years with ASA PS 1 or 2, who were scheduled to undergo major surgery lasting more than 1 h under general anaesthesia were enrolled in the study. The exclusion criteria were as follows: 1) anticipated difficult airway management, 2) probability of massive bleeding or transfusion during the surgery, 3) a history of neuromuscular disease or associated medications, 4) a history of allergy to steroidal NMBAs, 5) severe hepatorenal impairment, and 6) having a cardiac pacemaker, implantable cardioverter/defibrillator, or other metal implants, as bioelectrical impedance analysis (BIA) measurement is contraindicated in such patients.

2.2. Patients’ allocation into muscular and non-muscular group
All participants enrolled in the study received body composition measurements using a body composition analyser (Inbody S10® Biospace, Seoul, Korea), according to the manufacturer’s guidelines, on the day before surgery. The BIA device, Inbody S10®, analyses body composition using a four-compartment model, which divides body composition into four components: total body water, protein, mineral, and body fat [6]. Although dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry is considered the gold standard for measuring body composition, the BIA method has been validated in several studies [7], [8], [9]. BIA is a cost-effective, easily bedside-applicable, and radiation-free body composition measurement method. Before the measurement, the patients were requested to rest in a supine position for at least 10 min. Throughout the measurements, various body composition measures, including skeletal muscle mass (SMM) (kg), body fat mass (kg), and the amount of extracellular and total body water (L), were evaluated. In addition, calculated measures, including skeletal muscle index (kg m−2) and percent body fat, were determined. The skeletal muscle index was defined as the amount of SMM in kilograms divided by the height in meters squared.

Although the linear relationships between body weight and SMM were identified from our preliminary findings (not discussed in this manuscript), we assumed that subjects may have various amounts of SMM even with comparable TBW and body mass index (BMI) values. Consequently, the administered dose of rocuronium per SMM (mg kg−1) would be variable when TBW-based dose of 1 mg kg−1 rocuronium was administered and this discrepancy might affect the pharmacology of rocuronium. In accordance with this assumption, we created a linear regression model for each sex between the administered dose of rocuronium per SMM (mg kg−1) and patient’s body weight (kg) (Fig. 1(A) and (B)). The subjects were allocated into two groups: muscular and non-muscular. The muscular and non-muscular groups included participants below and above the linear regression curve, respectively.

2.3. Anaesthesia protocol and neuromuscular monitoring
The standardised anaesthetic protocol was established in this study according to the guidelines for good clinical research practice in pharmacodynamic studies of NMBAs [10]. Standard anaesthetic monitoring, including electrocardiography, pulse oximetry, and non-invasive blood pressure and bispectral index measurement, was performed. Total intravenous anaesthesia with propofol and remifentanil, using a target-controlled infusion pump, was chosen to maintain general anaesthesia according to the guidelines [10] because volatile anaesthetics are known to potentiate the magnitude and duration of neuromuscular block. Anaesthesia was induced with propofol 3.0–5.0 μg ml−1 and remifentanil 1.5–4.0 ng ml−1 in effect-site concentration, and neuromuscular monitoring was initiated when loss of consciousness developed.

For neuromuscular monitoring, acceleromyography of the adductor pollicis using TOF Watch® SX (Organon, Dublin, Ireland) with a hand adaptor was applied to the patient’s arm contralateral to the blood pressure cuff. Train-of-four (TOF) monitoring is a typical tool that measures the response of the muscles by applying four electrical nerve stimulations at a frequency of 2 Hz. Two surface electrodes were placed over the ulnar nerve at a distance of 3–6 cm. Before the administration of rocuronium, stabilisation and calibration of the acceleromyography were performed. For signal stabilisation, 50 Hz tetanic stimulation was performed for 5 s, followed by TOF stimulation every 15 s until a variation within 5% was observed for at least 2 min. Calibration and supramaximal stimulation using the CAL2 built-in function, which automatically adjusts gain to obtain a twitch height of 100%, were performed to ensure the reliability of the data. Subsequently, a single bolus dose of rocuronium 1.0 mg kg−1 TBW was rapidly injected for 5 s, followed by TOF stimulation every 15 s. The TOF count or ratio was used to assess the degree of neuromuscular relaxation. The first twitch value of the TOF is T1. The data measured by TOF Watch® were automatically collected into a portable computer equipped with the TOF Watch® monitoring program version 2.5.

The onset time of rocuronium included the elapsed time from the rocuronium injection until a 95% depression of T1 (Tdep95) and the time to no response to TOF stimulation (TTOF0). The duration of rocuronium was evaluated as the elapsed time from the rocuronium injection to 25% recovery of the final T1 value (TDUR25) and the time to the reappearance of T1 (TTOF1) and the reappearance of T4 (TTOF4). Patient demographics, including body composition measures, and the data regarding the pharmacologic effects of rocuronium such as Tdep95, TTOF0, TDUR25, TTOF1, and TTOF4, were compared between the two groups.

2.4. Sample size calculation and statistical analysis
Sample size was predetermined by t-test sample size calculation using IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, version 26 based on the assumption that the minimum detectable difference between the two groups in Tdep95 was 5 s. A total of 104 patients were required with a significance level of 0.05 (α = 0.05) and a power of 80% (β = 0.20). Considering predicted dropout rate, the total sample size was increased to 120.

All statistical analyses were performed using IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, version 26. Continuous variables were analysed by a two-tailed t-test or Mann-Whitney rank-sum test after a normality test. All descriptive data are expressed as the number of patients, mean (SD), and median [interquartile range]. A p-value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

3. Results
Among the 101 participants enrolled, 89 subjects (40 men and 49 women) were analysed. The participants were allocated into muscular or non-muscular groups for each sex, according to the administered dose of rocuronium per SMM in relation to the patient’s body weight. Among the 12 patients who did not complete the study, eight were excluded due to TOF monitoring system error. A flow diagram of subject selection and allocation is presented in Fig. 2.

Demographic data and body composition characteristics were compared between the muscular and non-muscular groups (Table 1). In both sexes, the mean age of the two groups was similar. There were no significant differences in body weight or BMI between the two groups. Body fat mass and the proportion of body fat mass to body weight of the non-muscular group were significantly higher than those of the muscular group in both sexes. The muscular group had a greater amount of extracellular and total body water than the non-muscular group. Plasma electrolyte levels, including Na+, K+, and total calcium, were not statistically different between the two groups (Table 2).

The average doses of rocuronium administered per SMM (mg kg−1) in men were 2.1 (0.2) and 2.5 (0.4) in the muscular and the non-muscular groups, respectively (p =  0.003). In women, the average doses of rocuronium per SMM were 2.6 (0.2) and 3.1 (0.2) in the muscular and non-muscular groups, respectively (p <  0.001). The pharmacologic effects of rocuronium between the muscular and non-muscular groups are summarised in Table 3. In both sexes, the onset of rocuronium (Tdep95 and TTOF0) was not significantly different between the two groups. However, the duration of action of rocuronium significantly differed between the two groups for each sex. TDUR25 was significantly shorter in the muscular group than in the non-muscular group. In addition, TTOF1 and TTOF4 were also significantly shorter in the muscular group than in the non-muscular group in both sexes.

4. Discussions
The current study evaluated the pharmacology of NMBAs according to the patients’ body composition characteristics despite similar body weight and height. In clinical practice, the dosing of NMBAs including rocuronium is generally based on TBW although the amount of SMM is presumed to be more important than TBW in the pharmacologic effects of NMBAs. The current study suggests that TBW-based dosing of rocuronium may prolong the duration of neuromuscular block in patients with a small amount of skeletal muscle relative to TBW. The authors thought that those patients who were categorised to muscular group may be more active in their daily life. It is known from previous observations that muscular activity increases the number of Ach receptors at the NMJ through neuronal and trophic factors [11], [12]. And larger volumes of extracellular and total body water would contribute to reduce the plasma concentration of rocuronium than in the non-muscular patients. As a result, the relative low plasma concentration of rocuronium would be less competitive antagonism with ACh receptor at the neuromuscular junction in the muscular patients than in the non-muscular patients. Therefore, the recovery from the neuromuscular block would be faster in the muscular patients in the current study.

In clinical anaesthesia practice, identifying the onset time of NMBAs is crucial for determining the optimal timing of endotracheal intubation. Although the larger dose of rocuronium induces the onset time faster [13], [14], a large dose may unexpectedly prolong the duration of neuromuscular blockade. Conventionally, two or three times the ED95 (dose required for 95% depression of the twitch height) of rocuronium is used to facilitate endotracheal intubation during anaesthesia induction, and 0.6–0.9 mg kg−1 TBW of rocuronium is used because the ED95 of rocuronium is 0.3 mg kg−1 [15]. In the current study, a single bolus of 1.0 mg kg−1 of rocuronium was administered. There were no significant differences in the onset time of rocuronium between the muscular and non-muscular groups. This result seemed to be caused by the administration of a relatively larger dosage of rocuronium (1.0 mg kg−1). The onset time after 1.0 mg kg−1 of rocuronium administration has been investigated to be only about 60 s in previous studies [13], [14], [16]. Because TOF stimulation was repeated at 15 s intervals according to the guidelines [10], it would be difficult to find the differences in the onset time of rocuronium between the two groups in the current study. The author assumes that if a smaller dose like 0.3 mg.kg-1 of rocuronium had been chosen, the onset time might be different between the two groups.

Evaluating the effects of different amounts of SMM on the pharmacology of NMBAs have been studied [17], [18]. In a recent study, the pharmacologic effect of rocuronium was better correlated with the amount of skeletal muscle than TBW [18]. The study used pre-determined dose of rocuronium in the participants with specific range of height and body weight. However, the dose is much smaller than clinical usage. In contrast, the current study included subjects with various ranges of body weight and height and used clinically applicable doses (1.0 mg kg−1), more suitable for clinical application.

Several studies have suggested that ideal body weight based dosing of rocuronium in morbidly obese patients [1], [2]. Because the usual dosing method based on TBW may significantly prolong the duration of rocuronium in this population, various dosing scales including lean body weight, fat-free mass, or corrected body weight, have been applied to determine the appropriate dose of the drug [2]. However, the dosing scales cannot reflect the real body composition, such as SMM and body fat mass. Furthermore, the amount of extracellular and total body water affects the pharmacokinetics of rocuronium. The previous studies showed that pharmacokinetics is altered in morbidly obese population [1], [19]. The present study recommends that a new dosing scale using body composition including SMM and body water is necessary, and it will provide a better prediction of neuromuscular block.

These is a limitation of the current study. The effect of ages may be a potential confounder and can bias the study results. Advancing age is associated with the alteration of the pharmacokinetics of rocuronium and morphological and physiological degeneration of the neuromuscular junction [20], [21]. These changes may affect the pharmacodynamics of rocuronium. Although an extreme age is associated with the prolonged onset and duration of rocuronium in a recent study [22], it is controversial whether old age affects the pharmacology of rocuronium [23], [24], [25], [26]. New dosing scheme of NMBAs applying various predictors such as age as well as body composition would be required.

In conclusion, the pharmacologic effect of rocuronium may be affected by the composition of body components. TBW-based dosing of rocuronium might prolong the neuromuscular relaxation effect in patients with a small amount of skeletal muscle.
