Background

Digital health

The challenges for health systems associated with ageing 
populations and the increasing prevalence of chronic 
diseases have driven explorations for ways to provide 
safe, high quality, equitable and sustainable health care 
using digital health technologies [1]. Digital health platforms, 
such as telehealth technology, wearable health 
gadgets, and consumer-facing mobile apps, may serve as 
useful contributors to both healthcare and research outcomes 
[2]. For example, digital health technologies have 
been associated with increased client self-management, 
compliance, improved education and monitoring [3–5]. 
These benefits are forecasted to significantly improve 
health outcomes for those with chronic conditions, given 
the unprecedented access to remote clients.

The health and fitness wearables market has undergone 
significant growth [6, 7], which presents new opportunities 
to efficiently collect and monitor client data (in 
person or remotely) to improve healthcare consumers’ 
outcomes, including facilitating accurate and timely 
diagnosis and intervention [8] and the quality of the care 
they receive [2]. Challenges highlighted by the Australian 
Institute of Health and Welfare [8] (e.g. equal access, 
continuous and accurate transfer of information between 
systems, ensuring everyone understands the ownership 
and use of personal data, and protecting sensitive information) 
need to be negotiated in all instances of their use.

Massage therapy and chronic health conditions

Studies over many years have confirmed the uptake of 
natural medicine products and services for the treatment 
and management of chronic health conditions [9–11]. 
Massage therapy has been particularly popular for those 
suffering osteoarthritis [9, 12–14], however evidence 
supporting massage therapy intervention for osteoarthritis 
has been hampered by the low/moderate quality of the 
studies, including high risk of bias [14, 15]. The few systematic 
reviews and clinical practice guidelines that have 
been published suggest that massage therapy may lead to 
short term improvements in pain, stiffness and functional 
scores in those with knee and hip osteoarthritis [14, 16]. 
However, given the uptake of massage therapy among 
people with osteoarthritis, further research is warranted. 
A mobile or wearable app with the capacity to collect 
large volumes of data quickly [17] could have applications 
in this field. Data could be analysed and converted 
into evidence to support massage therapy interventions 
for osteoarthritis and other chronic health conditions. 
It could also be used to capture data from individuals in 
their natural environments, creating opportunities for 
understanding and individualising treatment approaches.

Walking speed apps

Walking speed is a simple measure that could be used to 
assess the benefits of massage treatment. It is a predictor 
of mobility and survival length, particularly in an ageing 
population [18]. Liu et al. [18] reported an 89% increase 
in all-cause mortality (RR: 1.89, 95%CI: 1.46, 2.46) for the 
slowest walkers (compared with fastest) in populations of 
people 65 years and over. A number of government initiatives 
have emerged to promote active lifestyles, particularly 
in ageing populations [19, 20]. Apps that can 
be downloaded onto smartphones to facilitate exercise 
are promoted on government websites[21]. MapMyWalk 
(https://www.mapmywalk.com/) is one such app 
that enables users to track the duration of a walk, distance 
walked, speed and calories burned during the walk 
through their mobile smart phones.

Few studies have investigated the effect of massage 
therapy on walking ability in people with arthritis. Some 
studies have investigated its use in conjunction with 
physical exercise for people with other chronic health 
conditions. For example, a scoping review of the effects 
of massage therapy on patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease found insufficient evidence to 
support the use of massage therapy alone, however, the 
authors noted that massage therapy is often proposed 
as a therapeutic option when used in association with 
physical exercise with the effect of massage therapy on 
walking ability assessed by the 6-minute walk test [22]. 
A randomised controlled trial of 31 people aged 50–85 
years found that 30-minute massage therapy, as needed 
to manage acute flare ups, improved walking ability, also 
used the 6-minute walk test as the primary outcome, but 
that 30-minute massage therapy coupled with exercise 
showed greater improvements [23]. As pain is associated 
with limiting both walking speed and duration in people 
with lower limb osteoarthritis [24, 25], massage therapy 
has the potential to increase walking speed through a 
reduction in pain in the affected joint. Further investigations 
of the impact of massage therapy on walking ability 
could therefore improve our understanding of its contribution 
to reducing all-cause mortality.

Methods

Aims

The primary aim of the study was to assess the feasibility 
of using a phone app to measure walking ability in people 
with osteoarthritis. The secondary aim was to determine 

Keywords Feasibility study, Osteoarthritis, Massage therapy, Limitation, mobility, Walking speed, Mobile applications

whether the app could detect a change in walking ability 
following massage therapy intervention.

Study design

This feasibility study used a mixed-methods prospective, 
observational study design to collect data from both 
clients and massage practitioners over a 4 to 6-week 
period. Feasibility outcomes included practitioner and 
client recruitment and protocol compliance. Pre-study 
surveys and focus group discussions where practitioners 
were able to share their experiences of and confidence 
in participating in the research added further insights 
to the feasibility of this type of study among massage 
practitioners.

Settings

Massage practitioners were situated in their own practices, 
which were located in metropolitan and rural 
regions in Queensland, New South Wales, South Australia, 
Victoria and Western Australia. Clients received massage 
therapy in their usual massage practitioners’ clinics 
and walked in their local communities.

Recruitment of massage practitioners and clients

Recruitment of massage practitioners occurred between 
March and April 2021 and clients between June and 
November 2021. Massage practitioners were invited to 
participate via a nation-wide call promoting the study 
in the Journal of the Australian Traditional Medicine 
Society (ATMS) and the ATMS subscription electronic 
digital messaging service. Recruitment was extended 
to other massage therapy professional associations who 
used similar strategies to notify their members. Additionally, 
a research assistant contacted massage practitioners 
by telephone and email to invite them to the study, 
using directories from professional massage associations. 
Interested massage practitioners were invited to attend a 
2-hour on-line training session to learn more about the 
study, their role in the research and the availability of an 
honorarium for participating. Following the training session, 
massage practitioners who consented to join the 
study were then asked to assist with recruiting two or 
more clients to participate in the study by displaying a 
flyer in their clinics that referred them to a study research 
assistant. Massage practitioners were also instructed 
how to complete a client report form after every massage 
treatment provided as part of the study.

Interested clients contacted the research assistant 
by telephone and email. The research assistant then 
explained the study, detailed eligibility for participation, 
discussed what participation entailed, and answered any 
questions the clients had. Clients had the option of completing 
an online consent form or emailing the signed 
consent form to the research assistant. Eligibility criteria 
for massage therapy practitioners and massage clients are 
detailed in Table 1.

Training sessions for massage practitioners

The training sessions were delivered online via Zoom 
(https://zoom.us/) to facilitate nation-wide participation. 
Sessions commenced with an overview of the study and 
its significance. This was followed by a presentation from 
the research assistant responsible for managing data collection 
from practitioners (via Client Report Forms, pre- 
and post-study questionnaires, focus group discussions), 
and from the research assistant responsible for managing 
data collection from clients (walking data from the app, 
pain and mobility diaries). Finally, the app was demonstrated 
to practitioners, who were also encouraged to 
practise using the app before the study so that they could 
advise and assist their clients.

The app

MapMyWalk (https://www.mapmywalk.com/) is a popular 
mobile app that is compatible with both Apple and 
Android mobile phones. The app is simple to use and 
provides users with data on average speed, distance 
walked, start time, and walk duration [26]. However, reliability 
and validity of the app have not yet been established 
for all populations.

Data collection

Data collection from massage practitioners and clients 
occurred continuously from June through December 
2021.

Massage practitioner data

Participating massage practitioners completed a short 
online pre-study questionnaire about previous research 
experience, their confidence in participating in the study 
and their expected outcomes. They were also invited 
to attend a one-hour focus group discussion at the end 
of the data collection period. Focus group discussions 
were held for practitioners in which they discussed their 
experiences and perceptions of the study, including 

Table 1 Eligibility criteria for practitioners and clients

Eligibility criteria – massage practitioners

• Accredited massage therapy practitioner (member of an Australian 
massage or complementary medicine professional association)

• Willing to assist with recruiting at least two clients with chronic osteoarthritis 
to the study

• Willing to provide informed consent and to comply with the study 
protocols

Eligibility criteria – massage clients

• Over 18 years of age

• Diagnosis of osteoarthritis in any joint by a GP or medical specialist

• Willing to provide informed consent and comply with the study 
protocols

suggestions for improving the study and reflections on 
their learnings about research. Focus group discussions 
were held virtually using the zoom platform. Recordings 
were transcribed and checked against the recordings for 
accuracy before analysis.

Client data

Baseline data were collected at enrolment including age, 
gender, height, weight, joint(s) affected by osteoarthritis, 
length of time since osteoarthritis diagnosis, and current 
medications. Clients were required to undertake between 
one and four massage treatments over a 4-week period, 
as determined by their normal clinical management. Clients 
were instructed to choose a walk they could comfortably 
complete every other day, or a minimum of three 
times a week over a 5-week period.

Clients were asked to walk with their phone over a 
5-week period, at the same time each day, and along the 
same route if possible. To collect walking speed data, 
clients were instructed to: (i) download the app to their 
mobile phone; (ii) enable the app and walk for a minimum 
of 10 min; (iii) take a screen shot of the results at 
the end of each walk and text or email it to the research 
assistant; and (iv) turn off the mobile app between walks. 
A research assistant provided technical assistance with 
these processes by telephone and email as needed. Clients 
were also asked to keep a diary of unusual events 
(e.g. holidays, changes in exercise routine, illness) and a 
weekly summary of subjective perceptions of pain and 
mobility using an online or paper diary. Clients self-
assessed their pain levels using a 0–10 visual analogue 
scale (VAS) [27] (0 = no pain at all; 10 = the worst pain you 
can imagine). Regarding mobility, clients were asked to 
provide free text answers to the question: How was your 
mobility this week?

Outcomes

The primary outcome was the feasibility of using a phone 
app to assess walking speed following massage therapy 
intervention for clients with osteoarthritis. The secondary 
outcome was the feasibility of the app to detect 
changes in average and maximum walking speed. Details 
of feasibility outcomes are outlined in Table 2.

Study size

The study aimed to recruit a convenience sample of 30 
massage practitioners and 100 clients (that is, approximately 
3 clients per practitioner). As this was a feasibility 
study, the sample size was informed by the nature 
of the feasibility factors under consideration, including 
duration and ease of recruitment for both practitioners 
and patients, and the types of data to be collected and 
analysed.

Data analysis

Qualitative data analyses

Before data analysis commenced and throughout the 
analysis, the two members of the research team conducting 
the qualitative data analysis (SG and LB) reflected 
on the influence their own backgrounds and beliefs 
might have had on their interpretive analyses. SG and 
LB acknowledged that their complementary medicine 
backgrounds in practice, education and research may 
influence relationships with study participants, data 
interpretation and analyses. As LB communicated regularly 
with trial participants during recruitment and data 
collection, she did not facilitate the focus groups to prevent 
the possibility that her presence could influence 
participants’ discussion and participation. While SG and 
LB’s complementary medicine backgrounds could potentially 
influence their interpretations of data, they also 
acknowledged that their backgrounds could potentially 
increase participants’ trust and willingness to participate 
in the research and add to the richness of their engagement 
with the data.

Qualitative data from the focus group discussions with 
massage practitioners were analysed using thematic analysis 
as described by Braun and Clarke [28, 29]. During 
analysis, SG and LB independently analysed transcripts 
by hand independently after reading them numerous 
times to ensure a thorough understanding of the data. 
Themes were grouped together for analysis. All transcripts 
were coded by SG and LB separately before SG 
and LB met to discuss and identify and refine themes for 
final analysis, ensuring codes were applied consistently 
and achieving richer interpretations of meaning [30].

All client data were de-identified before analyses. Qualitative 
data from clients’ pain and mobility diaries was 
grouped and reported descriptively. Their analyses represent 
SG and LB’s “reflective and thoughtful engagement” 
with the data and the analytic process [29], p594.

Statistical methods

Individual trajectories of walking speed over time were 
plotted in relation to massage treatment times. Graphs 
were visually inspected for patterns around the massage 
treatment times and for overall trends over time: increasing, 
decreasing or remaining unchanged. Descriptive 
statistics were used to summarise the data for average 
and maximum walking speed. In addition, the number 
and percentage of clients whose walking speed were 
either increased, decreased or remained the same were 
calculated.

Results

Recruitment and participation

Thirteen massage practitioners completed the training 
and were recruited to the study with eleven going on to 

successfully recruit clients to the study and 10 completing 
the study. The 11 massage practitioners recruited 
26 massage clients who were assessed for eligibility and 
included in the study. Of these, 22 completed the study. 
Results of recruitment and participation are illustrated in 
Fig. 1.

Massage practitioners

Eleven massage practitioners were female and one was 
male. The massage practitioners practised in New South 
Wales (n = 5), Queensland (n = 3), Western Australia 
(n = 2), South Australia (n = 1) and Victoria (n = 1)). Eight 
practised in metropolitan locations and four in rural 
areas.

Massage clients

Twenty-two clients completed the study, 16 (73%) were 
female and 6 (27%) were male. The minimum age of 
clients was 44 years and the maximum 85 years, with a 
mean age of 64.3 (SD = 10.6) years. The mean weight at 
baseline was 83 (SD = 15.4) kg. The mean BMI of clients 
was 29.9 (SD = 4.5). Most of the clients (n = 12, 55%) 
reported their primary location of osteoarthritis as the 
knee, with osteoarthritis of the spine being the next most 
reported site (n = 6 clients, 27%) (Table 3). Regarding 
prior confidence in using an app, 14 (64)% rated themselves 
as reasonably confident, and 8 (36%) felt very confident 
in using an app.

Feasibility outcomes – massage practitioners

Feasibility of recruiting massage practitioners for practice-
based research

The recruitment period spanned 2 months (March-April 
2021). A total of 53 massage practitioners responded to 
a call for Expressions of Interest in the study. Each was 
sent a copy of the Participant Information Sheet and 

Table 2 Feasibility outcomes and data sources

Feasibility Outcomes

Data source

Feasibility outcomes - massage practitioners

i) Feasibility of recruiting massage practitioners 
for practice-based research

• Number of expressions of interest received

• Number of practitioners who enrolled and completed the training

• Time to recruit practitioners

• Number of practitioners who completed the study

• Research logs

ii) Feasibility of massage practitioners recruiting 
their clients for practice-based clinical research

• Number of clients enrolled

• Number of clients who completed the study

• Time to recruit clients

• Research logs

iii) Practitioners’ compliance with study 
protocols

• Number of practitioners who submitted all client report forms

• Client report 
forms submitted to 
research assistant

iv) Practitioners’ knowledge of and confidence 
in research pre-study

• Previous involvement in research (qualitative responses)

• Confidence in managing the research in their clinics (qualitative responses 
and a sliding scale 0-100, 0 = no confidence; 100 = complete confidence)

• Confidence that the study would be able to measure effectiveness of massage 
treatment (qualitative responses)

• Online pre-study 
survey

v) Practitioners’ post-study reflections on participating 
in the study

• Focus group discussions used a semi-structured interview guide to explore 
practitioners’ experiences of participation

• Focus group discussions 
post-study

Feasibility outcomes - clients

vi) Client compliance with using the app

• Ease of teaching clients to use the app

• Number of clients who submitted all walk data

• Research logs

vii) Client subjective perceptions of pain and 
mobility (measured weekly by self-report in 
pain and mobility diaries)

• Pain - measured by a 0–10 visual analogue scale [27] (0 = no pain at all; 
10 = the worst pain you can imagine)

• Mobility - self-reported qualitative data

• Client pain and 
mobility diaries

viii) Client subjective perceptions of pain and 
mobility (as recorded by practitioners in Client 
Report Forms)

• Pain- measured by a 0–10 visual analogue scale [27] (0 = no pain at all; 
10 = the worst pain you can imagine)

• Mobility - self-reported qualitative data

• Client Report 
Forms completed 
by practitioners 
at the beginning 
of each client visit 
as part of medical 
history

Feasibility outcomes – phone app measures

Feasibility of phone app measures to detect 
actual changes in average and maximum walking 
speed

• Changes in average walking speed over 5-weeks as measured by the app

• Changes in maximum walking speed over 5-weeks as measured by the app

• Data from the app 
recording average 
and maximum 
walking speeds for 
each walk taken by 
a client

Consent From and a follow-up email. Of those 13 were 
trained and 11 went on to enrol. The main reasons cited 
for not enrolling were high client volume and potential 
loss of income associated with voluntary participation in 
the study. One practitioner was unable to recruit clients 
in the time frame required for inclusion in the study; 10 
practitioners completed the study.

Feasibility of massage practitioners recruiting their clients for 
practice-based clinical research

Twenty-six clients were enrolled in the study over a five 
month period (June - November 2021). Of these, 22 fully 
participated and completed the study, two withdrew 
from the study after suffering injuries unrelated the study, 
and two clients completed the study but sent incomplete 
data. Due to COVID-19 restrictions on face-to-face contact 
with clients, the length of the recruitment period 
was extended beyond the original projected two-month 
period. In addition, some clients ‘paused’ their contact 
with the study during COVID-19 lockdowns, returning 
once they were able to see their massage practitioner 
again. The two clients who sent incomplete data were not 
affected by this ‘pausing’ of participation.

Practitioner compliance with study protocol

Nine of the ten practitioners whose clients finished the 
study completed Client Report Forms for every client 
visit. One practitioner sent in Client Report Forms with 
inconsistent visit dates.

Practitioners’ knowledge of and confidence in research pre-
study

Twelve practitioners completed the pre-study online 
survey. Of those, nine had not been involved in research 
previously. Two had experience as participants and one 
had conducted a systematic review as part of their undergraduate 
degree.

The majority of massage practitioners felt confident 
that they could manage the research in their clinics: ten 
(83%) responded ‘definitely’ and two (17%) responded 
‘probably’. Their concerns were about client participation. 
For example, one participant commented:

Treatment [will be] easily managed in my clinic. 
Hoping clients are well motivated and have the time 
to complete. (Practitioner participant #2)

Fig. 1 Results of recruitment and participation in the study

Table 3 Primary location of clients’ osteoarthritic pain

Primary location of osteoarthritic pain

Frequency 
(n)

Percent 
(%)

Ankle/foot

1

5

Hip

2

9

Knee

12

55

Shoulder

1

5

Spine

6

27

Total

25

100


Practitioners were also asked to rate their confidence on 
a sliding scale from 0 to 100 with 0 meaning low confidence 
and 100 high. Responses ranged from 59 to 100, 
with a mean of 85.7 and standard deviation of 14.0.

Practitioners were asked whether they thought the 
study would be able to measure the effectiveness of their 
treatment: three (25%) said definitely yes, seven (58%) 
said probably yes, one (8%) said ‘might or might not’ and 
one (8%) said ‘probably not’. One practitioner commented 
on the impact of the pandemic on her clients:

COVID will also differentiate [my clients] as one is 
an essential worker with a medical background who 
has not been particularly impacted by COVID - a 
motivated exerciser who finds any opportunity for 
activity, whereas the other is an older lady who has 
felt particularly locked down and isolated through 
the pandemic. (Practitioner participant #6)

Practitioners’ post-study reflections on participating in the 
study

In the three focus group discussions, practitioners discussed 
their motivation for joining the study as well as 
their beliefs about the benefits of massage. Many spoke of 
a desire to educate the public about these benefits. Practitioners 
also discussed their beliefs that massage therapy 
could provide benefits beyond giving clients ‘a luxury or a 
treat’ such as preventing and treating injuries.

There are still a lot of people who don’t realise how 
beneficial massage is … it’s a great tool to treat injuries 
and prevent future injuries. I’m also getting 
people in when they don’t necessarily have anything 
wrong with them as such, because prevention is better 
than cure. (Practitioner participant #1)

Another motivation was to find evidence for massage 
therapy as an intervention that could reduce pain associated 
with osteoarthritis.

There’s such a delay in surgery, these days, because 
they don’t want to do surgery until patients are 
60–65 years of age so there are a lot of people in a 
lot of pain after the age of 40, some even earlier than 
that. I think if we can find anything that helps [their 
pain] before they have to go as far as surgery, well 
that’s a good thing. (Practitioner participant #2)

All practitioners expressed that their experiences of being 
in the study were enjoyable. They felt they were contributing 
to something important for their profession.

It’s great to feel like you are part of a team doing 
something like this. I definitely learned a lot because 
I’ve never done anything like this before and I was 
interested to see if I would enjoy it and to have a look 
to see if it is feasible to use an app to track how clients 
are doing, so I did really enjoy it … I found it 
really interesting so far and I think I’m pretty interested 
in research now so that’s good - something I’ve 
learnt. (Practitioner participant #3)

The study was conducted during the COVID-19 pandemic 
and some practitioners were forced to close their 
practices during government restriction periods. This 
caused recruitment delays for some, and interruptions 
between clinic visits for others.

My ladies were actually quite keen and I think they 
had spoken with [research assistant] and I think 
[research assistant] had talked to them about the 
app as well, so when we had to stop and then start 
up again they were really ready to go and, unfortunately, 
when it all started well there was just a little 
bit of having to get back to learning how to use the 
app again. In dealing with [research assistant] and 
texting her or myself with any questions, they found 
it okay. (Practitioner participant #2)

Practitioners commented on how easy participating in 
the study was, and they put this down to two things: (1) 
what they were required to do was similar to their usual 
clinical practice; and (2) they had very good support from 
the research assistants.

I didn’t sit down for hours afterwards. I just wrote 
up my notes like I normally would. So for me, it was 
just part of my day. It just happened to be a study 
that I was partaking in at the same time. (Practitioner 
participant #1)

… every aspect of the study had someone that’s sort 
of in charge of it, and I think that’s [what] helped it 
flow along quite well in that … I found, as the person 
doing the massage, it was wonderful when people 
did have queries regarding the app, I could say I’ll 
check that with [research assistant]. And also just 
me having [research assistant] I could go to with any 
questions I might have had. So it was good in that 
the support was there, so it made it a good thing to 
participate in and easy as well. (Practitioner participant 
#4)

Because of the similarity with their daily practice, some 
practitioners felt what they learned about research was 
limited. However, many reported learning a lot about 
how research works. As one said:

… the methods, the theories and the discussions. 
It’ll be very interesting to read the outcome of your 
research and it is a good sort of a way to learn how 
research works. It is especially difficult in the field of 
massage therapy, so you chose this app very carefully 
and smartly so it’s a wonderful way to measure … I 
learned a lot. (Practitioner participant #5)

An unexpected benefit was that the study was an 
important motivator for some clients during the lockdown 
period. They were committed to the study and to 
their practitioner and so forced themselves to continue 
walking, even when they felt disinclined. Some clients 
reported to their practitioner that they became aware of 
the benefits of walking and continued their walking routine 
after the study completed.

… he was walking every day on top of that … obviously 
this trial also helped to motivate him. (Practitioner 
participant #5)

She’s an older lady who lives by herself. She had a 
bit of a hiccup in the middle, because she struggled 
with going back out after COVID. She struggled … 
she was thinking I’m not sure if I can do it, but she 
did. She got back out there, and she did it, so I think 
that kind of forced her through a funny time so that 
was really helpful. (Practitioner participant #2)

Clients’ compliance with using the app

The research assistant reported that it was relatively easy 
to teach clients how to use the app. She spent between 
15 and 60 min with each client teaching them how to use 
the app. A step-by-step instruction sheet was developed 
which helped with the training, and the research assistant 
also provided additional training over the telephone 
and by email with additional screenshots when necessary. 
Once the initial training occurred, clients were able 
to self-manage use of the app and the support required 
from the research assistant was minimal. Five clients 
needed text, telephone or email reminders to send data 
to the research assistant, but most clients did this independently 
and frequently. For those needing reminding, 
additional support and training in using the app was 
offered.

Client compliance with study protocol for sending walk 
data from the app was relatively high, as 22 sent complete 
data regularly throughout their participation. Only two 
clients sent incomplete data (their incomplete data not 
was included in the analyses).

Clients’ subjective perceptions of pain and mobility (self-
reported diary data)

Compliance with completing pain and mobility diaries 
was much lower with only 9/22 clients completing any 
diary data and only four completing the diary for all 5 
weeks of participation (Fig. 2). Pain scores ranged from 3 
to 10 on the patient reported VAS for Week 1 of the study 
and from 3 to 7 on the VAS for Week 5 of the study. Some 

Fig. 2 Clients’ weekly pain scores as recorded on a 0–10 visual analogue scale


clients’ pain levels stayed relatively stable (e.g., P9 and 
P12) while other clients reported higher fluctuations in 
pain levels (e.g. P11). Two clients (P9 and P21) reported 
worse pain at the end of the study while three clients’ 
pain decreased (P2, P11, P25) (Fig. 2).

Mobility data reported in clients’ pain and mobility diaries 
included simple qualitative responses like ‘good’ or 
‘poor.’ Some clients included information they felt may 
have affected their mobility such as:

Mobility wasn’t too bad, having soreness with my left 
leg shin. (Client #12, Week 2)

Mobility has been good. Bit more stiffer than other 
weeks and Saturday was awful - I ended up taking 
6 anti-inflammatories over the day so I could move. 
(Client participant #9, Week 4)

When I eventually went for a walk, my legs were very 
stiff. Knees also painful after the walk. Second walk 
not as bad. (Client participant #21, Week 2)

When reporting their mobility, some clients took the 
opportunity to reflect on how they felt the massage therapy 
was affecting their walking ability.

After a massage I am able to move my back and legs 
better but after a few days it goes back to niggling 
and aching pain. (Client participant #9, Week 2)

Client subjective perceptions of pain and mobility, as 
recorded in client report forms

Practitioners collected pain data on a VAS scale of 0–10 
(0 = no pain at all; 10 = the worst pain you can imagine) at 
each clinic visit for all 24 clients. Of these, data for two 
clients were excluded due to inconsistencies in dates of 
clinic visits. Of the 22 clients with usable data, visual 
inspection of pain scores suggested that over the duration 
of the study pain decreased for eight clients, did 
not change for nine clients, and increased for five clients 
(Supplementary File 1).

Feasibility of using a phone app to assess walking speed 
following massage therapy intervention for clients with 
osteoarthritis

Changes in average and maximum speed

Twenty-two client participants provided data from 
their walks over the course of 5 weeks. Average speed 
remained unchanged for 15 (68%) participants and 
decreased for 7 (32%) participants. Maximum speed 
increased for 11 (50%) participants, decreased for 9 (41%) 
and remained unchanged for 2 (9%) (Table 4). However, 
on closer inspection, spurious values that could not be 
accounted for were reported by the app. These resulted 
in issues of reliability using the maximum walking speed 
as measured by the app, so there were no further analysis 
using maximum walking speed.

An example of data collected from individuals is illustrated 
in Fig. 3. For this participant (Client participant 
#6), average walking speed decreased slightly over time. 
However, after the first two treatments, there appears 
to be an improvement in walking speed, as indicated by 
increased speeds in the walks directly following massage 
treatment. The response to the third treatment seems to 
have been delayed, with the second walk following treatment 
reflecting increased speed. The participant continued 
to track and send in walking data but did not return 
for a fourth massage treatment. Graphing individual trajectories 
over time enabled individual-level analysis of 
responses to treatment.

Discussion

Feasibility

The results of this study suggest that it is feasible to 
recruit massage therapy practitioners and their clients 
for an effectiveness trial involving mobile/wearable technology 
to measure changes in walking speed following 
massage therapy. Notwithstanding restrictions imposed 
as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, practitioners 
were able to recruit clients with osteoarthritis in a timely 
manner, in part because massage therapy is seen by the 
general public as beneficial for osteoarthritis [14]. Compliance 
with study protocols for using the app (clients) 
and providing some pain and mobility data (clients and 
practitioners) was sufficient to determine their feasibility. 
Having a dedicated research assistant for clients, particularly 
those who were unfamiliar with the use of phone 
apps, aided compliance, and is supported by the literature 
[4].

As healthcare moves towards personalised medicine, 
individual patient data will become an increasingly 
important source of information [31, 32]. The use 
of mobile/wearable technologies like the one used in this 
study could be extended to include other types of practitioners 
for measuring the effectiveness of other complementary 
medicine interventions on people with different 

Table 4 Changes in average and maximum walking speed after 
5 weeks of the intervention (n = 22 client participants)

Increase (n, 
%)

Decrease (n, 
%)

No 
change 
(n, %)

Average speed

0 (0)

7 (32)

15 (68)

Maximum speed

11 (50)

9 (41)

2 (9)


chronic diseases. The significance of the project lies in 
its potential to develop a standardised outcome measure 
that demonstrates effectiveness of an intervention. Such 
an approach could be used to assess treatment effects at 
both the individual and population level. Furthermore, 
as walking speed is a prognostic indicator in a number of 
chronic diseases, the effectiveness of different interventions 
could be directly compared [33–36]. As each person 
would have their own baseline walking speed, individual 
treatment effects could be assessed against individual 
baselines. The development of a common standardised 
outcome measure such as a walking speed app, may facilitate 
aggregation of multiple individual-level results to 
enable inferences to population means, which could, in 
turn, be used to inform practice.

While the clients of massage practitioners were committed 
to the research, there were interruptions beyond 
the control of clients caused by the mass lockdowns 
during the first and second waves of the COVID-19 
pandemic. Clients could not readily access massage treatments, 
which caused some unanticipated disruptions to 
the juxta-positioning of the walking data to the timing 
of the massage treatments. These disruptions may have 
impacted the results, for example by reducing the capacity 
of the data to reliably demonstrate possible changes in 
walking speed after massage treatment within and across 
individuals’ data. Nevertheless, the data collected from 
the app allowed for visual inspection of the individual trajectories 
over time and for exploration of intra-individual 
and inter-individual patterns in those who were able to 
undertake more than one treatment. It is probable that 
multiple massage treatments are required in future studies 
to establish a relational pattern with the walking data. 
In addition, other types of contextual data are required to 
help to understand and interpret any patterns and interruptions 
noted in the walking time-series data in relation 
to the massage treatments.

Building massage practitioners’ research capacity

Collaborative partnerships between researchers and 
complementary medicine practitioners have been proposed 
as an enabling strategy to the conduct of research, 
in order to build the evidence-base in complementary 
medicine, including massage therapy [37]. Collaborative 
partnerships between researchers and practitioners 
can overcome barriers to participation in research by 
providing practitioners with resources and appropriate 
research governance to be involved in research, improve 
their research literacy and competencies [38]. This study 
exposed a cohort of massage practitioners to practice-
based clinical research. Results showed that massage 
practitioners were prepared to commit their time and 
resources to clinical-based research, as they felt the 
research would benefit their profession by building its 
evidence-base. By engaging practitioners through online 
collaborative sessions attended by the entire research 
team, we attempted to cultivate an atmosphere where 
practitioners could openly discuss their reasons for 

Fig. 3 Average walking speed over 5-weeks’ participation in the study for one participant (Client participant #6)


joining the study, the various stages of the research, their 
confidence in how they responded and their expectations 
about outcomes. Sharing knowledge among members of 
virtual teams has been found to build trust and collaboration 
[39]. Feedback from practitioners confirmed that 
there is potential to create a positive experience around 
research among massage practitioners and supports the 
proposal that collaborative partnerships can facilitate 
evidence-based research [37, 38].

Facilitating exercise

The data analysis found there was no change in the average 
walking speed of 68% of participants, while 32% of 
the participants had decreased average walking speeds. 
This was an unexpected finding that could in part be 
explained by the disruptions to scheduling massages 
that occurred in and around the national lockdowns. 
However, it may be the case that walking speed is a complex 
functional activity that requires more long-term 
interventions before improvements can be detected 
and demonstrated. It may be that there are better, more 
standardised measures for walking speed such as the 
10-meter walk test [40]. However, the exponential accessibility 
of wearable technologies and digital apps are 
worthy of further research as they have the potential 
to collect a huge amount of live data simultaneously, 
while encouraging people to exercise in a naturalistic 
environment.

Another unexpected finding reported in this study was 
that clients who would not have normally exercised due 
to the COVID-19 restrictions, did exercise as part of participating 
in the study. Many expressed that they enjoyed 
walking, that participation motivated them to walk and 
‘get out of the house for exercise’ despite government 
restrictions or self-imposed social isolation due to a fear 
of contracting COVID-19. Ironically, while COVID-19 
warranted the adoption of contingency plans to address 
the impact of the pandemic on clinical trials [41], this 
study was able to continue in its original format.

Recommendations for future research

The willingness of the clients and the practitioners to 
contribute towards generating an evidence base for massage 
therapy signals that future studies would be well 
supported by the industry. Future research could include 
a fully-powered randomised controlled trial to measure 
the effect of massage on walking ability in seniors with 
osteoarthritis, incorporating multiple massage treatment 
points over a longer period of time to demonstrate 
clear patterns for individuals. The development of a 
purpose-built app tailored to suit the collection of data 
from massage therapy clients is also recommended. This 
is important to expediate the flow of real-time data from 
client to researchers and for researchers to have access 
to the full data in an interactive format, as distinct from 
summary statistics at discrete measurement points. The 
purpose-built app could include features that allow participants 
to record their self-reported pain and mobility 
data and dates of massage treatment. This would facilitate 
more comprehensive data collection and help with 
accurate data analysis.

Limitations

There were a number of limitations associated with this 
study. The first was the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic 
on recruitment of both practitioners and clients with 
both target sample sizes not reached. While this may 
affect the generalisability of results regarding efficacy, this 
study was designed as a feasibility study to inform future 
research designs, and therefore was not reliant on efficacy 
measures [42]. Given the circumstances, the sample sizes 
achieved supported the feasibility of conducting such 
a study. The second limitation was the delay for some 
participants between starting the study and completing 
it. This too, was the result of the COVID-19 pandemic 
and the restrictions associated with it. It is unlikely that 
a larger trial conducted in the future would be subject to 
the same conditions. We therefore argue that this limitation 
should be considered a one-off. The third limitation 
was the nature of the data available on the MapMyWalk 
app. Some of the measures were cumbersome and not 
suited to clinical massage therapy research, which hindered 
our ability to determine whether the app could 
detect a change in walking ability following massage 
therapy intervention. This was particularly noted in the 
maximum speed data, where the app, at times, seemed 
to record spurious values that could not be accounted 
for in the contextual data and did not seem plausible, and 
therefore could not be relied upon in the analysis of individual 
trajectories over time. The average walking speed 
was the more feasible measure for this app, but may have 
not been as sensitive to change after massage treatment 
as maximum walking speed. Developing a purpose-built 
app that better suits massage therapy clients could overcome 
such difficulties.

Conclusion

This study shows that recruiting massage practitioners 
and their clients for a study involving mobile/wearable 
technology to measure improvements in walking speed 
following massage therapy is indeed feasible. Practitioner 
recruitment indicated that massage practitioners were 
prepared to commit their time and resources to clinical-
based research. Notwithstanding restrictions resulting 
from the COVID-19 pandemic, most practitioners were 
able to recruit clients with osteoarthritis in a timely manner. 
The results from this study support the call for larger 
randomised clinical trials to measure the medium and 
long-term effects of massage therapy on walking speed in 
people with osteoarthritis.