Active surveillance (AS) for low-risk prostate cancer (PC) is recommended as a preferred treatment option.1,2 Reports on AS from single academic institutions have been promising, with very high 10-year cancer-specific survival (CSS) of 99%-100%.3,4 However, academic centers include highly-selected cohorts with protocol-based follow-up. While the PRIAS network, the U.S. Veterans Affairs system, and the Swedish studies report on less-selected patients with less stringent “real life” follow-up, they predominantly focus on AS uptake. We lack data on long-term oncological outcomes in a well-defined AS cohort at the population level. Moreover, many published studies do not distinguish between AS and watchful waiting (WW). This is problematic since WW and AS are dissimilar approaches and result in different oncological outcomes. Additionally, selection of treatment approach (AS or initial definitive intervention) is driven by complex patient and provider factors that affect outcomes,5 yet none of the studies reporting on long-term oncological outcomes adjusted for these factors. Our primary objective was to examine long-term oncologic outcomes with AS and initial curative treatment in low-grade PC at a population level using a landmark approach. 
Methods 
We carried out an observational, population-based study using linked administrative databases in Ontario, Canada.6 We included men diagnosed from 2002-2014 with de novo PC (codes: ICD-9 185, ICD-10 C61, histology 8140) that was low-grade (Grade Group 1) based on a diagnostic procedure (transrectal ultrasound biopsy) within 30 days of diagnosis. Patients were excluded if the Gleason score at diagnosis was not abstracted, or if they had medical or surgical castraStudy Cohorttion within 365 days of diagnosis. All data sources are described in Supplemental Table 1 (https://www.jurology.com) and in prior studies.7,8 
Study Cohort 
Men were classified as starting initial AS if they had low-grade PC, did not receive any definitive treatment (ie, surgery, radiotherapy, or brachytherapy) within 6 months of diagnosis, and had a confirmatory biopsy within 2 years from diagnosis (details of cohort creation in Supplemental Figures 1 and 2, https://www.jurology.com). Initial treatment cohort was defined as patients with low-grade PC who received definitive treatment within 6 months of diagnosis. 
Outcomes 
Primary outcomes 
Given the long natural history of low-risk PC, development of metastasis is an intermediate endpoint and a good surrogate for cancer-specific mortality.9,10 We used a previously-validated algorithm to identify metastasis in PC patients from Canadian Institute for Health Information-Discharge Abstract Database procedure codes and Ontario Health Insurance Plan claims.11 Time to metastasis was calculated starting at the landmark date (2 years from diagnosis) until metastasis or censoring. Overall mortality was defined as all-cause mortality during follow-up. Survival time was calculated from the landmark date (2 years from diagnosis) until death. PC-specific mortality was defined as death from PC (code C61) during follow-up. We used cause of death provided by the Ontario Cancer Registry. Patients with mortality from other causes were censored at the date of death. 
Secondary outcome: transition to definitive treatment and treatment type after initial AS 
The date of AS discontinuation was defined as the date of receipt of subsequent treatment after initial AS. 
Statistical Analyses 
Continuous and categorical variables were compared between cohorts with Wilcoxon tests and χ2 tests, respectively. We performed a landmark analysis at 24 months to avoid immortal time bias12 in the primary analysis (rationale in Supplemental Figure 3, https://www.jurology.com). The survival rates at 5-, 10-, and 15 years for metastasis-free survival (MFS), CSS, and overall survival (OS) were estimated using the Kaplan-Meier method, and the log-rank test was used to compare between cohorts. For the landmark analysis, follow-up time started at 2 years post diagnosis; therefore, the 5-, 10- and 15-year timepoints approximate 7, 12, and 17 years post diagnosis. Missing data for PSA, number of positive cores, and maximum percentage of core were imputed using multiple imputations (m = 20 data sets). Multivariable Cox proportional hazards (PH) models were used to evaluate associations between MFS, CSS, and OS, adjusting for age and year of diagnosis, adjusted clinical groups comorbidity score, disease characteristics at diagnosis (PSA: 0-4, 4.1-10, and 10+, positive core: 1, 2, 3, 4+, and maximum % of core: 50+ vs <50), rurality (rural/urban status), patient income quintiles, and provider characteristics (hospital type: academic, nonacademic, and regional cancer center; physician type: urologist, radiation oncologist, and others; physician and institution volume). Physician and institution volume (tertile) were based on the number of new low-grade PC patients seen by that physician or institution during the year at risk. We used Schoenfeld residuals to evaluate the PH assumption.13 Multivariable survival analysis followed the methods and model building described by Austin.14 Multicollinearity was assessed using tolerance and variance inflation factor scores.15 We performed a sensitivity analysis after constructing an ideal AS cohort (confirmatory biopsy within 1 year, PSA <10, positive cores ≤3, and maximum percentage of cores <50% at diagnosis) intended to represent patients who were most appropriate for AS and likely received higher quality of care. Additionally, an all-case analysis (full cohort without landmark approach) was conducted. We repeated the analysis using a propensity-based approach. Propensity scores (PS) were created using logistic regression modeling of a patient’s likelihood of receiving AS and the matching caliper was defined as 0.10 of the standard deviation of the logit of the PS (details in Supplemental Table 6, https://www.jurology.com). We used the missing-indicator approach for dealing with missing data. Cox PH modelling was then performed. We considered a P value < .05 to be statistically significant, and all analyses were performed with SAS 9.4. 
Results 
Among the 21,282 men with low-grade PC in the landmark cohort, AS was started in n = 9,311 and initial treatment was provided in n = 11,971 (Supplemental Figure 2, https://www.jurology.com). Pathological characteristics (PSA, positive cores, and maximum % core) in the AS cohort were significantly more favorable than the initial treatment group (all P < .05, Table 1). There was no evidence of collinearity among variables in the multivariable model (Supplemental Table 2, https://www.jurology.com). The Schoenfeld residuals were not correlated with time, upholding the PH assumption (data not shown). 
Metastasis (Landmark Analysis) 
The 5-, 10- and 15-year MFS is shown in the Figure and Supplemental Table 3 (https://www.jurology.com; estimates from the landmark analysis approximate 7, 12 and 17 years post diagnosis). In adjusted Cox models, risk of metastasis was significantly higher with AS than initial treatment (HR 1.34, 95%CI 1.15-1.57, P ≤ .001). Other predictors of metastatic disease were increasing age, higher comorbidity, lower income quintile, and being managed by a nonurologist physician (Table 2). 
Overall Mortality (Landmark Analysis) 
The Figure and Supplemental Table 3 (https://www.jurology.com) show the OS estimates at 5, 10 and 15 years. In adjusted Cox models, risk of overall mortality was significantly higher with AS vs initial treatment (HR 1.12, 95%CI 1.01-1.24, P = .038). Predictors of overall mortality were increasing age, higher comorbidity, higher PSA, higher positive cores and maximum % of cores at diagnosis, lower income quintile, nonacademic hospital, and nonurologist physician (Table 3). 
PC-specific Mortality (Landmark Analysis) 
There were 64 deaths from PC with AS and 73 with initial treatment during a median 10 years of follow-up. CSS at 5 and 10 years for AS was 99.4% and 98.1%, and for initial treatment it was 99.6% and 99.1%, respectively (see Figure and Supplemental Table 3, https://www.jurology.com). In multivariable analyses, factors associated with PC-specific mortality were use of AS (HR 1.66; 95%CI 1.15-2.39 vs initial treatment), older age, higher maximum % cores, and lower income quintile (Table 4).
Discontinuation of AS 
The discontinuation of AS (transition to definitive treatment) was 62.9% over a median follow-up of 10 years. The treatment-free survival rate at 5, 10, and 15 years was 50.2%, 38.7%, and 33.7%, respectively (Supplemental Table 3, https://www.jurology.com). 
Sensitivity Analyses 
Overall, analyses for the ideal cohort and the full cohort (all cases) resulted in multivariable adjusted HRs for AS vs initial treatment that were similar in direction, and not dramatically different in magnitude, to the primary landmark analysis (Tables 2-4, and Supplemental Tables 4 and 8, https://www.jurology.com). The estimates of 5-, 10-, and 15-year survival rates were also broadly similar to the primary landmark analysis (Supplemental Tables 5 and 9, https://www.jurology.com). We note that CSS was lower in the ideal AS cohort (at 10 and 13 years), and the estimate of the adjusted HR for PC-specific mortality decreased from 1.66 in the primary analysis to 1.14 with the ideal AS cohort; however, the 95%CIs were wide (0.45 to 2.89). There were no statistically significant associations of cancer-specific variables (PSA, number of positive cores, or maximum core percent) with PC-specific mortality or metastasis when assessed within the AS cohort only. 
PS Matching Analysis 
After PS matching, the study population consisted of 7,525 men in each cohort. Before matching, large imbalances between cohorts were observed, and PS matching was effective in eliminating imbalances between cohorts (Supplemental Table 6, https://www.jurology.com). PS analysis confirmed the results from the main analysis (Supplemental Table 7, https://www.jurology.com). 
Discussion 
In this large population-based study of low-grade PC from Ontario, Canada, we examined long-term oncological outcomes over a decade of follow-up and found similar rates of metastases and OS at 5, 10, and 15 years between AS and initial treatment. However, adjusted results showed worse metastasis, overall mortality, and PC-specific mortality in the AS cohort compared to initial treatment using a landmark approach. A propensity-based approach confirmed the results of our primary analysis. Although outcomes on AS are excellent, these results do suggest that some men are misclassified or may miss an opportunity for cure. With the landmark approach, MFS on AS at 5-, 10-, and 15-year follow-up was 98.1%, 94.2%, and 88.9%, respectively. Prior single-institution studies on AS reported MFS ranging from 97.6% to 99.2% at 5 years, 97.3% to 99.9% at 10 years,3,4,16-21 and 93.0% to 99.9% at 15 years.3,16 However, the landmark approach, 5-, 10-, and 15-year timepoints more closely represent 7, 12, and 17 years post diagnosis. Using the full cohort (without landmark approach), we found similar 5- and 10-year (post-diagnosis) MFS in AS, but slightly lower 15-year MFS compared to reports from academic centers (Supplemental Table 9, https://www.jurology.com). This is likely due to relatively short median follow-up and few outcomes in published studies leading to imprecise estimates. Our 5- and 10-year OS outcomes at a population level are comparable to published series from mostly single-academic centers,3,4,16-23 which is reassuring (Supplemental Table 9, https://www.jurology.com). Although our 15-year results appear to be better than those of published studies, direct comparisons are difficult due to differences in patient populations and analysis strategy (landmark analysis) and only a few series having 15 years of follow-up. In our landmark approach, CSS at 5- and 10-year follow-up was 99.4% and 98.1% for AS and 99.6% and 99.1% for initial treatment, respectively. These estimates are similar to published data from academic centers and reinforce that AS can be implemented at a population level with excellent long-term CSS.3,4,16-25 However, at 10-year follow-up, we found slightly lower CSS with AS (98.1% vs 99.1%, overall HR for PC-specific mortality was 1.66, 95%CI 1.15-2.39, for AS vs initial treatment). We also observed worse PC-specific mortality in lower Discussionsocioeconomic groups and rural inhabitants. A Swedish population-based study also reported significantly higher PC death at 10 years after diagnosis among men with low-risk PC who received surveillance (including AS and WW) compared to initial treatment (2.4% vs 0.7%);22 however, no statistically significant difference was observed in a UK-based randomized trial (approximately 1% irrespective of treatment—radical prostatectomy, radiation therapy, or AS).20 Although the absolute difference we observed in CSS between AS and initial treatment was 1% at 10-year follow-up, these numbers need to be contextualized by the burdens of initial treatment. Our data suggest that 125 patients on AS would need to receive initial treatment to prevent 1 PC-specific death at 10 years, at a cost of the known side effects associated with standard treatments. The estimated rates for urinary, bowel, and sexual-related side effects are 11%-27%, 3%-17%, and 72%-83%, respectively.26 In our sensitivity analyses of an ideal AS cohort, only 17/4,831 men died from PC over 10 years of follow-up (99.3% survival rate) and the difference between AS and initial treatment seen in the main analysis was reduced. While the reduced sample size and lower statistical power limit interpretation of the sensitivity analysis, the results suggest that PC-specific mortality may be slightly higher with AS in the real-world setting. The latter points to a need for a careful discussion between patient and clinician to balance treatment-related side effects and impact on quality of life vs the modest decrease in PC-specific mortality associated with intervention. With regard to the need for intervention, just over one-third of patients remained treatment-free on AS after 10 years of follow-up. This is lower than in published academic series, which range from 44%-64% at 10-year follow-up.3,4,20,27 The higher percentage in academic series may be due to more formalized settings and protocols, better counselling during initial AS uptake, active monitoring, or quality of care. Our study has several limitations. Firstly, AS was inferred if there was no definitive treatment claim, as there is no specific physician billing claim code for AS. This may result in some degree of misclassification bias due to WW or advanced patients being incorrectly classified as AS, which may lead to worse estimates of MFS, CSS, and OS for AS. Nevertheless, our results for most of these outcomes agree with published data (Supplement Table 9, https://www.jurology.com). Secondly, we recognize that while patients with missing pathological data differed from the included patients, the available characteristics suggest that these patients were not appropriate for a low-risk cohort (Supplemental Table 10, https://www.jurology.com). In addition, several data on prognostic variables such as cancer staging (missing in 34% of AS patients) and PSA level that influence treatment choice and outcome were not complete. However, Gleason score, which is key to defining AS eligibility, was available and our outcomes agree with published data. Thirdly, coding for metastasis is not as accurate as other outcomes in our databases and may lead to underreporting, although our estimates are similar to published studies. Also, cause of death data were not as current as OS since cause of death was available only until December 2015. Finally, most patients were diagnosed in the pre-MRI era using traditional biopsy techniques. Some jurisdictions have started using pre-biopsy multiparametric MRI for PC patients who intend to undergo AS to improve early identification of high-grade cancer;28,29 however, MRI may not be readily available to all men with low-risk PC.29 Other strategies to risk stratify patients, including biomarkers, advanced imaging techniques, and newer biopsy strategies (such as transperineal), are now becoming available and may better select patients for AS.28,29 While mature data on outcomes will take many years,30 these strategies will likely improve oncological outcomes for AS patients and reduce any differences compared to radical treatment.29 This study has several important strengths including the size of the cohort, length of follow-up, and use of population-based outcomes within the context of universal health care. Furthermore, we distinguished between AS and WW. The various analytical approaches used—landmark methods to avoid immortal time bias and propensity matching to reduce selection bias—are additional strengths. Single-center results lead to practice change, but outcomes after widespread adoption are important measures of the true resulting impact of change. 
Conclusions 
In this large, real-world study of long-term outcomes in men with low-grade PC, AS is associated with excellent long-term MFS and OS. However, CSS was slightly inferior at 10 and 15 years compared to initial treatment. Slightly inferior CSS with AS must be weighed against known long-term sequelae of active treatment. 