Background

Omega-3 fatty acids, primarily docosahexaenoic acid
(DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), from fish oil
are among the most frequently used dietary supplements, with 7.8% of U. S adults self-reporting frequent
ingestion in 2012 [1]. Omega-3 has an established antiplatelet effect, and efforts have been made to examine
through which specific mechanism(s) Omega-3 fatty
acids affect platelet aggregation – with various results
[2–5]. Dyerberg et al. [6] in 1979 suggested that high intake of Omega-3 fatty acids (fish oil) among Eskimos
may cause increased bleeding. Definitive evidence is
however nonexistent as to whether this antiplatelet effect
on its own actually translates into increased clinical
bleeding in patients [2, 7, 8]. A recent review identifies a
platelet inhibiting effect of fish oil with no increased
perioperative bleeding [9]. The platelet inhibiting effect
of Omega-3 is probably weak, as the combination with
clopidogrel does not to increase bleeding [10]. There are
no reports on Omega-3 and stronger platelet inhibiting
drugs. Omega-3 + warfarin does not increase bleeding
[11]. There are no reports on Omega-3 and the new oral 
anticoagulants. 

Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid, ASA) is a widely used 
medication among adult patients for prevention of conditions 
such as cardiovascular disease, pain and inflammation. 
Between 2012 and 2015, more than 30% of U.S. 
adults aged 40 years and older self-reported taking low 
dose ASA for prevention of cardiovascular disease [12]. 
Considering the fact that the patient group most likely to 
frequently ingest supplementary Omega-3, namely patients 
at risk for cardiovascular disease, are also indicated 
for ASA treatment, a significant number of patients likely 
use both substances. ASA should not usually be withdrawn 
prior to surgery as it is considered to be a weak 
platelet inhibiting drug [13], with the exception of neurosurgery 
[14]. The effect can be measured with MEA, but a 
platelet inhibiting effect does not always transfer into an 
increased perioperative bleeding [15]. 

A synergistic or additive antiplatelet interaction between 
Omega-3 and ASA has been suggested by some 
studies [4, 16, 17]. A decrease in venous thromboembolism 
after total knee arthoplasty has been related to 
ASA+ Omega-3 synergism [18]. However, interactions 
between dietry supplements with antiplatelet effects and 
interactions with anticoagulation and antiplatelet drugs 
are not well studied [19]. 

The objective of the present study was to investigate 
the potential additional/synergistic effects of ASA + 
Omega-3 on platelet function with a point-of-care plateletet 
aggregometer, multiple electrode aggregometry 
(MEA), not studied before. 

Methods 

This observational non-randomized, non-blinded screening 
study was approved by the Regional Ethical Review 
Board, Lund (registration number 2010/482) and was 
conducted in accordance with the World Medical Association 
Code of Ethics (Helsinki Declaration 1975). The 
manuscript was prepared in accordance with the 
STROBE guidelines for observational studies. Consent 
was given both orally and in writing. 

Ten healthy, male volunteers (aged 21–29, median 23) 
were recruited. No females were studied as female gender 
affects platelet function/platelet count and MEAresults 
[20]. Also Omega-3 has a stronger platelet inhibitory 
effect on males [21]. Exclusion criteria were recent 
intake of alcohol, anticoagulant or antithrombotic medicine. 
Subjects were instructed to ingest a standard recommended 
dose (1260 mg) of two capsules of Omega-3 
fish oil (Pharbio Omega-3 Forte®, Pharbio Medical International 
AB, Solna, Sweden) per day, one in the morning 
and one in the evening, for 4 days. Day 5, 2 capsules 
were ingested 2 h before sampling (see below). A total of 
ten capsules (12,600 mg) were ingested per volunteer 

during the study period. This daily dose represents an 
intake of 600 mg eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), 400 mg 
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), 60 mg docosapentaenoic 
acid (DPA) and 200 mg of other Omega-3. American 
Heart Association recommends at least 250 mg/day of 
EPA + DHA [22] and FDA not more than 2 g per day 
from dietary supplements (www.fda.gov). 

Blood sampling 

Three ml of venous blood was drawn from an antecubital 
vein using a vacutainer system before and at the fifth 
day of Omega-3 treatment period. The volunteers rested 
30 min before sampling and had had no stress or physical 
exertion during the morning, which can increase 
platelet aggregation [23]. Blood was collected in a 3.0 ml 
Hirudin blood tube (Roche Diagnostics GMbH, Mannheim; 
Germany). The hirudin sprayed within the blood 
tube exerts its inhibitory effect on thrombin, without 
interfering with physiological calcium levels [24]. The 
blood samples were stabilized at room temperature for 
30 min, followed by MEA analysis within 3 h as recommended 
by the manufacturer [24] and Würtz et al. [25] 
to reduce test variability. 

Impedance aggregometry 

MEA analysis was performed using Multiplate Analyzer® 
(Roche Diagnostics Scandinavia AB, Bromma, Sweden; 
V2.03.11). Through its 5 independent channels the Multiplate 
device is able to simultaneously measure the extent 
of platelet aggregation in each sample after the 
addition of different platelet agonists. Following the 
addition of platelet agonists, the change in electrical 
impedance between the two electrodes caused by the 
aggregation of platelets is detected. This change in 
electrical current is plotted in a graph over time and 
the results are expressed as area under the curve 
(AUC). The AUC represents the extent of platelet aggregation 
[26, 27]. 

Before analysis, 300 µl of prewarmed 9 mg/ml NaCl 
(B.Braun, Melsungen, Germany) was added to each test 
cell, followed by 300 µl of whole blood. The whole blood 
and NaCl were incubated and stirred for 3 min. Then 
20 µl of platelet agonists were added to their designated 
test cells. Three different platelet agonists were 
used, I) Adenosine diphosphate (ADP), 6.5 µM, an 
agonist which binds to ADP receptors and activates 
platelets through the release of endogenous ADP 
from dense granules, II) thrombin receptor activating 
peptide (TRAP), (32 µM), a strong activator of platelets 
via the thrombin receptor, and III) ASPI (0.47– 

0.50 mM), which initiates platelet aggregation through 
the COX pathway [24]. COX is responsible for catalyzing 
the transformation of AA into thromboxane 
A2, a known potent activator of platelets [24]. 


Two concentrations of ASA were titrated to be added 
to two of three ASPI test cells, calculated to resemble 
real life blood concentrations with ASA treatment. 500 
mg of ASA (Aspirin I.V. Bayer AG, Leverkusen, 
Germany) was diluted in 3 ml of sterile water to ca. 170 
mg/ml. One concentration, termed high dose ASA, was 
diluted 10 times to 17 mg/ml. Another concentration, 
termed low dose ASA, was diluted 100 times to 1.7 mg/ 
ml. Then 30 µl of low respectively high dose ASA was 
added to ASPI test cells with a final concentration, of 0, 
8 mg/ml and 0.08 mg/ml respectively. The concentration 
of 0.08 mg/ml closely resembles the estimated physiological 
concentration of 0.1 mg/ml following intravenous 
treatment of 500 mg ASA (the recommended treatment 
for acute myocardial infarction [28]. Intravenous (iv) aspirin 
ensures a better platelet inhibtion [29]. Our 
in vitro and ex vivo ASA protocol is more adherent to 
an iv approach. 

Six minutes after addition of agonists the AUC of each 
test was recorded. ASPI-AUC was measured in three test 
cells: one without ASA and the other two in the test 
cells with added ASA. In total, the following 5 AUCs 
were analysed: ADP, TRAP, ASPI without ASA, ASPI 
with low and high dose ASA. 

Statistics 

Sample size was calculated using G*Power version 3.1, 
(Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Germany) and 
was based on previous data on MEA-analyses before and 
after Omega-3 intake [26, 27]. With an alfa error probability 
of 0.05 and a power of 0.9 the sample size had to 
be 8. We aimed at 10 volunteers to allow for sample 
failure. 

The other statistical analyses were performed using 
GraphPad Prism version 8.3.0 (GraphPad Software Inc., 
La Jolla, CA). Gaussian distribution was tested using the 
D’Agostino & Pearson test and the Shapiro-Wilk test. As 
Gaussian distribution was found, statistically significant 
changes in AUC following Omega-3 intake were analysed 
using a paired T test. Significance level was set at 
P < 0.05. Potential outliers were analysed using the 
ROUT method. 

Results 

One volunteer was excluded from the study due to poor 
compliance. In total, nine volunteers were included in the 
statistical analyses. There were no significant changes in 
the MEA ADP, TRAP or ASPI-assays after Omega-3 intake 
(Fig. 1 and Table 1). In vitro ASA before Omega-3 reduced 
ASPI AUC < 30 U, indicating a strong platelet 
inhibiting effect. Below this AUC level, both ex vivo added 
low dose ASA (P = 0.02) and high dose ASA (P = 0.04) increased 
ASPI-AUC on the 5th day of Omega-3 intake 
(Fig. 2 and Table 1). A corresponding borderline 

nonsignificant increase in ASPI AUC (P = 0.07) within 
normal reference range could also be detected from before 
Omega-3 and on the 5th day (without ASA) (Table 1), indicating 
some non-inhibitory effect of Omega-3 on the 
ASPI-test. No outliers were found. 

Discussion 

The in vitro ASA effect on the MEA-ASPI prior to 
Omega-3 ingestion and the ex vivo ASA effect on the 
5th day of Omega - 
3 intake indicated a strong platelet 
inhibition with an ASPI AUC < 30 U. However, no additive 
or synergistic platelet inhibitory effect of 5 days peroral 
ingestion of Omega-3 was found using the MEA 
ASPI test. 

The MEA ASPI test entails adding an AA agonist to 
the test cell blood sample, triggering platelet activation 
via the COX pathway. AA is a substrate of COX, which 
transforms AA into thromboxane A2, a potent platelet 
activator. It is a commonly held view that Omega-3 exerts 
its platelet function via inhibition of the AA-COX 
pathway. The basis for this view is that the Omega-3 
fatty acids EPA and DHA competes with AA for COX, 
which might attenuate its action on AA. Also, following 
Omega-3 intake EPA and DHA are integrated into the 
phospholipid membrane, potentially at the expense of 
AA. This could also reduce AA-induced platelet aggregation 
[30]. If Omega-3 inhibits platelet aggregation via 
the AA-COX-axis, the ASPI AUC (representing AA induced 
platelet aggregation) would reasonably decrease 
following Omega-3 intake. 

Our findings however contradict this view, as after 
Omega-3 intake the MEA ASPI AUC indicated an upward 
trend, although with no statistical significance, in 
the case of ASPI without ASA (P = 0.07). Significant increases 
in ASPI AUC after Omega-3 intake were seen 
with low dose ASA (P = 0.02) and with high dose ASA 
(P = 0.04) (Fig. 2). However, it must be stated that every 
individual value of ASPI AUC (without ASA) following 
Omega-3 intake was within normal MEA reference 
range [24, 26, 27], whereas some were below the reference 
value before Omega-3 intake (see below). Also, in 
the ASPI assays with both low and high dose ASA, all 
but 1 volunteer were below 30 U AUC (the exception 
having an AUC of 32 U in the ASPI+ASAx10 assay) following 
treatment. Less than 30 U ASPI AUC has been 
defined as the cut-off value for strong inhibition of 
COX-1 by ASA [31]. The fact that all but one AUC were 
still below this cut-off of strong inhibition, heavily indicate 
that Omega-3 did not actually reverse this inhibition, 
and that the significant increases in AUC of 
ASPI+low and high dose ASA may be related to test 
variability, intra-individual variation in test response at 
repeted testing [32]. Whole blood Multiplate testing with 
hirudin have a higher variability than citrate and asprin 


Fig. 1 Results from multiple electrode aggregometry (MEA) before and after Omega-3 intake, using thrombocyte receptor activating peptide 
(TRAP) and adenosine diphosphate (ADP). Results are presented as mean with 95% confidence interval. N.S.: non-significant 


Table 1 Results from multiple electrode aggregometry (MEA) assays 

MEA-ASSAY Reference AUC range Mean AUC before Omega-3 (95% CI) Mean AUC after Omega-3 (95% CI) P – value 
ADP 57–113 64 (52–76) 59 (42–76) 0.32 
TRAP 84–128 114 (102–126) 118 (105–130) 0.15 
ASPI with no ASA 71–115 78 (66–91) 86 (72–100) 0.07 
ASPI with LOW DOSE ASA N.A. 12 (9–15) 18 (13–22) 0.02 
ASPI with HIGH DOSE ASA N.A. 14 (9–19) 21 (17–26) 0.04 

AUC area under the curve, ADP adenosine diphosphate, TRAP thrombocyte receptor activating peptide, ASPII arachidonic acid 

Fig. 2 Results from multiple electrode aggregometry (MEA) before and after Omega-3 intake using arachidonic acid (ASPI) without acetylsalicylic 
acid (ASA), with low dose ASA and with high dose ASA. Note the different scales on the y-axes. *p = <0.05 

increase the test variability in hirudin anticoagulated 
ASPI-test [33]. With ongoing ASA treatment the MEA 
ASPI test has a coefficient of variation of 10% [34], but 
Pedersen et al. indentified a coefficient of variation (cv) 
of 8% increasing to 48% in the ASPI test before and after 
ASA treatment in healthy volunteers [35]. Such high 
ASPI test cvs have been corroborated by Peerschke et al. 
[33]. 

The lower ADP and ASPI AUC in some of the volunteers 
before Omega-3 intake may reflect unintentional 
over the counter drug intake or food/beverage intake 
with a similar effect, followed by a stricter regime during 
the study [32]. However only 2 of the volunteers increased 
in ADP response as compared to 7 in the ASPI 
response at the 5th day, hinting at a possible ASA/ 
NSAID effect, even though the volunteers negated this. 
Measuring thromboxane could have identified ASA/ 
NSAID effects [36]. 

Other studies examining the effects of Omega-3 intake 
using MEA have presented equivocal results. Kander 

et al. [26] found a significant decrease in ASPI AUC 
after adding Omega-3 in-vitro to blood from healthy volunteers. 
Mizia-Stec et al. [37] found a significant decrease 
of ASPI AUC in cardiovascular patients starting 
ASA and clopidogrel after percutaneous coronary inventions. 
A treatment group took Omega-3 – there were no 
differences in MEA (between Omega-3 patients and a 
control group without Omega-3 after 30 days in MEA 
(COL, TRAP, ASPI, ADP)), corroborating results of 
Watson et al. [10]. 

While our ASPI results do not necessarily support a 
procoagulant effect via the AA-COX pathway, they do 
indicate a lack of Omega-3 induced AA-COX antiplatelet 
effect. Recent studies also suggest this. Wada et al. 

[5] conducted a large experimental study comparing the 
effect of EPA versus AA on the COX pathway. EPA was 
found to be a very poor substrate for COX, suggesting 
that EPA has a limited ability to compete with AA as a 
COX substrate. Indeed, in a recent review article analysing 
multiple studies (including [5]) Wachira et al. [8] 

drew the conclusion that “there is little reason to believe 
that n-3 fatty acids affect platelet biochemistry primarily 
via the effects on the COX pathway”. Furthermore, while 
Gong et al. [4] found a synergistic effect on platelet aggregation 
between ASA and Omega-3 in mice, this was 
not affected by COX-1 knockdown. Aggregation was induced 
using ADP and collagen. Thus, while we in this 
study found no synergism or additive effect between 
ASA and Omega-3 in the AA-COX axis, such an effect 
may very well exist by other mechanisms. Also, Wachira 
et al. [8] suggests that metabolites of Omega-3 fatty 
acids produced through pathways other than the COX-
axis could affect platelet function and thereby aggregation. 
Consequently, the highly dynamic and complex 
biochemistry of the multiple fatty acids present within 
platelets may affect our ability to isolate and determine 
the pro-or anti-platelet effect of individual fatty acid 
otherwise exerted in vivo [38]. Our results support the 
notion that Omega-3 works via other pathways than 
AA-inhibition. 

In addition, several studies suggest that there could be 
other factors involved affecting the ASPI test and its 
AUC. In a recently published article, Ramström [39] investigated 
as to whether AA may cause lysis of blood 
cells, including platelets, and thereby affect ADPdependent 
platelet activation. Indeed, increasing concentrations 
of AA was found to cause cell lysis and release 
of ADP, suggesting that platelet activation may be influenced 
by the presence of ADP in the ASPI test. However, 
in the present study no efforts were made to 
examine this phenomenon, suggesting that our results 
may have been subject to its potential effect. Thus, 
raised awareness of potential effect by AA on the ASPI 
test is needed. 

Moreover, Christiansen et al. [40] recently published 
an article set to investigate as to whether risk variants of 
the AB0 locus among patients with stable coronary artery 
disease (CAD) may affect platelet activation and aggregation. 
Indeed, an increased platelet aggregation 
assessed by MEA was found to be associated with the 
risk variant rs495828. Although not examined in the 
present study, these findings suggest that possible risk 
variants of the AB0 locus among the included volunteers 
could have had an impact on our results. However, as 
the study population of Christiansen et al. predominantly 
consisted of male patients with stable CAD and a 
mean age of 65 years, their findings may not be relevant 
to ours. 

Denis et al. [41] found that mature platelets contain 
components of the spliceosome, although earlier considered 
to be limited to nucleated cells. Thus, these findings 
may indicate that platelets are able to splice pre-mRNA 
in response to exogenous signaling. Furthermore, Evangelista 
et al. [42] support this hypothesis of preserved 

functions and found evidence of signal and timedependent 
de novo synthesis of COX-1 in platelets, 
which may in part explain aspirin resistance. However, 
in the present study no sign of aspirin resistance among 
the included volunteers were observed. Also, a study 
conducted by Maree et al. [43] demonstrated that genetic 
variability in COX-1 may in part be responsible for 
the heterogeneous response observed in AA-induced 
platelets. In all, these studies indicate that platelets 
might contain preserved functions able to influence 
platelet aggregation, potentially explaining our surprising 
results. 

The present study adds to the complexity of determining 
the effect of Omega-3 fatty acids on platelet aggregation. 
Of note, 5 out of 9 volunteers were below MEA 
ADP AUC reference range following Omega-3 intake, in 
line with the decreasing trend. In all, these findings are 
consistent with previous studies; in a metanalysis of 15 
studies, Gao et al. [44] found a significant reduction in 
ADP-induced aggregation. As previously mentioned, the 
activation of platelets is complex and several components 
and pathways are thought to be involved. ADP is 
an important agonist which induces platelet aggregation 
through the membrane-bound P2Y12-receptor by indirectly 
increasing the cytosolic calcium-level (Ca2+) and 
thereby enable the complex formation of GpIIb/IIIa [45]. 
However, some studies show the contrary, indicating a 
negligible effect on ADP-induced platelet aggregation in 
the presence of Omega-3 fatty acids [27, 46]. 

Perhaps more advanced laboratory technology should 
be used to study Omega-3 effects on platelets. Omega-3 
can reduce the von Willebrand factor (shear dependant 
platelet activator) [47]. We have previously studied 
Omega-3 effects with an automatic flow chamber technique 
(Cellix™) with high shear stress, but failed to detect 
any platelet inhibiting effect [48]. Cohen et al. used electrophoretic 
quasi-elastic light scattering technology 
(EQELS) technology to study Omega-3 effects and found 
an increased negative resting platelet charge, e.g. decreased 
response to AA platelet activation [49]. They 
also used template bleeding time that increased with increasing 
doses from 1 to 8 g Omega-3. Interesting there 
were no changes in light transmission aggregometry, not 
even in patients on ASA/clopidogrel, corroborating our 
results that platelet aggregometry is not the adequate 
technique. The Omega-3 fraction EPA but not DHA can 
reduce platelet volume, an early sign of reduced platelet 
aggregation [50]. 

This study has several limitations. Only healthy young 
men were recruited as volunteers. As hypertriglyceridemia 
and coronary arterial disease have been shown 
to positively affect platelet responsiveness to Omega-3 
supplementation [44], volunteers should have been more 
physiologically representative of the relevant patient 

population. While every volunteer denied recent intake 
of ASA or NSAIDs, intake prior to enrolment in the 
study likely varied. Measurement of thromboxane levels 
in blood or urine could have identified this, but needs 
special laboratory resources [36]. Also, convincing evidence 
from several studies suggest that diet may have 
considerable influence on platelet function, and thereby 
risk of cardiovascular disease as well [51–54]. In the 
current study the volunteers were not instructed to report 
dietary habits. However, in a recent study conducted 
by Krekels et al. [55] no significant effect on 
platelet aggregation after smoking, coffee, high-fat meals 
or physical exercise was observed. Thus, future studies 
examining as to whether diet may affect platelet aggregation, 
when measured by methods such as MEA are 
needed. Furthermore, the great inter-individual variation 
of volunteers in response to Omega-3 treatment, as is 
evident in the individual response graphs in Figs. 1 and 
2, makes clear interpretation of results difficult. For instance, 
consider the ADP individual response graph with 
two volunteers strongly deviating from the otherwise 
clear trend of reduction, thus possibly skewing results. A 
greater sample size would limit this susceptibility and 
would increase statistical power. 

Another limitation of this study is the fact that the 5day 
Omega-3 treatment period might have been insufficient 
for Omega-3 to actually exert its platelet effects, although 
signifcant increases in plasma and red cells 
Omega-3 fatty acid concentrations can be meassured 
already at day 7, but increasing over time [56]. Intravenous 
administration of Omega-3 is rapidly taken up by 
platelets (4 h) and by erythrocytes (ERC) (improves 
deformability and blood flow [47]) after 48 h [57]. In 
vitro incubation with Omega-3 reduces thromboxane 
B2, prostaglandins F2,E 2 and D2 production from platelets 
already after 5 min [58]. Cao et al. [59]found an 
ingestion period of 8–20 weeks necessary to achieve 
an Omega-3 index (measuring total Omega-3 fatty 
acid concentration in plasma phospholipids and ERC 
membranes) recommended by von Schacky et al. for 
acardioprotective effect [60]. Different Omega-3 purified 
fractions also inhibit platelet aggregation with different 
agonists after varying oral intake periods. 
Platelet aggregation with DHA (6 g/day) was reduced 
already after 6 days (collagen/ADP), but with EPA 
only platelet aggregation to collagen could be detected 
so early; for ADP it took 4 weeks of EPA intake 
to detect a reducing effect [60]. 

Bagge et al. [26] found a significant change in MEA 
ADP AUC following 7 days of daily 1260 mg Omega-3 
ingestion in a prospective pilot study. However, in a 
follow-up study with 10 days of daily 2520 mg ingestion, 
no significant results were found [48]. While Cao et al. 
did not use MEA (unlike Bagge et al.), the far more 

direct method of measuring Omega-3 levels used by Cao 
et al. make their study more relevant in terms of discussing 
adequate Omega-3 treatment period for future studies. 
All in all, it is possible that significant results found 
after a treatment period shorter than that recommended 
by Cao et al. are merely chance findings that should be 
treated with caution. Recent research use higher doses 
of Omega-3 for longer periods and very advanced laboratory 
methods to evaluate cellular and antiinflammatory 
effects on cardiovascular health [60]. Although 
Omega-3 effects on platelets can be seen better in 
healthy volunteers, patients with risk factors should be 
studied – with higher doses [61, 62]. 

Conclusions 

No synergism between ASA and Omega-3 was found 
using the MEA ASPI test. The surprising increase in 
ASPI-AUC following Omega-3 intake and ex vivo ASA 
suggest that there are methodological issuses with the 
MEA ASPI test. Other platelet laboratory methods 
should be used to study Omega-3 effects on platelet 
function.