Infections are a major cause of illness and death in pediatric patients who undergo allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation (allo-HCT)—a curative therapy for many pediatric patients with hematologic malignant and nonmalignant disorders. Allo-HCT involves a cytotoxic conditioning regimen followed by infusion of donor hematopoietic progenitor cells. This therapy results in extensive gut mucosal damage and a period (from conditioning to engraftment) without cellular immune protection [1]. In addition, many pediatric patients experience a long period of relative immunodeficiency after engraftment due to their immature cellular immune system, or to immunosuppressive therapy used for prophylaxis or treatment of graft-versus-host disease (GVHD). The result is an increased risk for infectious complications, which limits the success and broader applicability of allo-HCT in pediatrics [2–5]. Among adults undergoing allo-HCT, bloodstream infections, pulmonary complications, relapse, GVHD, and mortality have been associated with changes in the intestinal microbiota [6–13]. This link may be from the microbiome's role in host metabolism, immune development, and intestinal barrier integrity [14–16]. In addition, the microbiome may serve as a surrogate marker for confounding risk factors that may directly influence infection risk and shape or disrupt the microbial communities within a patient. Much of the adult allo-HCT microbiome studies have focused on signals of microbiota disruption [17, 18], exposure to antibiotic agents [19], or domination of communities by single bacterial taxon [7, 20] and their association with adverse outcomes after allo-HCT. It is unclear whether findings suggestive of a relationship between microbiota composition and outcomes of allo-HCT in adults are generalizable to pediatric allo-HCT patients. Investigations into the pediatric microbiome and allo-HCT have been descriptive or limited in size [21–28]. One reason why generalizability should be questioned is the difference in composition of pediatric microbiomes compared to their adult counterparts [29–31]. Complication rates may also differ in pediatric allo-HCT patients, with infections remaining the most common complication. Immune reconstitution, which influences complications (eg, infections, GVHD, recurrence), may also differ between adult and pediatric patients [16]. Many of the factors that determine microbiota composition and resilience to disruption—nutrition, antibiotic regimens, microbiota temporal stability and conditioning regimens—differ widely between adult and pediatric transplantation centers [32]. Finally, there are large differences in pediatric immune systems (eg, thymic function, T-cell maturity and diversity) compared to those of adults which contribute to differences in both microbiome and in frequency of allo-HCT complications in the 2 populations. Here we investigate microbiota composition, phylotypes, and disruption to identify associations with clinical outcomes among pediatric recipients of allo-HCT.
METHODS 
Subjects 
Stool samples and clinical data were prospectively collected from pediatric patients aged ≤18 years undergoing allo-HCT at St Jude Children's Research Hospital between 2016 and 2019 (Supplementary Figure 1). Patients received anti-infective prophylaxis and empiric therapy per institutional guidelines (Supplementary Materials 1.1). The study protocol was approved by the institutional review board (IRB). Written informed consent and assent were obtained from all participants per institutional guidelines. De-identified leftover stool samples from healthy children collected for previous research studies were used for comparison. These samples were designated as nonhuman research by the St Jude IRB. 
Microbiome 
DNA extraction, polymerase chain reaction amplification of 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) V3–V4 regions, and amplicon and metagenomic sequencing were performed as described in the Supplementary Materials (1.3). Sequence variants were generated using DADA2 (1.12.0) [33], and then phylogenetically mapped to a custom reference set generated from full-length 16S rRNA gene sequences from Ribosomal Database Project (Taxonomy 16) [34], previously validated [35]. Phylotypes were formed by grouping amplicon sequence variants into clusters based on phylogenetic distance [36]. Amplicon sequencing depth yielded 55 000-513 000 classified amplicons (median, 166 000) and for metagenome sequencing yielded 7–75 million paired-end reads per sample (median, 25 million). Four microbiome community indices that may indicate disturbance were investigated (Supplementary Materials 1.5): diversity, bacterial load, relative frequency of butyrate-producing bacteria, and dominance. Diversity (evenness and richness of bacterial taxons within a community) was measured as the balanced weighted phylogenetic diversity [37]. As microbial gut diversity in children varies across age, communities were stratified into higher-diversity and lower-diversity groups according to the 20th percentile for age-matched healthy children (Supplementary Table 1). Bacterial load was determined using quantitative 16S rRNA gene quantitative polymerase chain reaction [38] and stratified based on the 20th percentile for age-matched healthy children (see Supplementary Table 1). Butyrogens were identified based on comprehensive survey [39] using methodology described in previous studies [40]. The relative frequency of butyrogens is significantly higher in children undergoing HCT than adult studies [40, 41]; stratification was based on median of age-matched healthy children (see Supplementary Table 1). Dominance measures the relative frequency of the most abundant taxa and is also more prevalent in young children than adult gut microbiomes; higher-dominance and lower-dominance groups were stratified according to the 90th percentile of abundance for age-matched healthy microbiomes (Supplementary Table 1). Compositional attributes were considered in terms of relative ratios of phylotypes using a new method that allowed for greater variation in microbiomes. This novel method yielded ratios composed of phylotypes hypothesized to have equivalent roles in variable microbiomes. These ratios, similar to Analysis of Composition of Microbiomes [42], allowed for capturing compositional variation (and ecological equivalence) while normalizing for sequence depth and bacterial load. Specific ratios were constructed of screened phylotypes that differ between groups in abundance and variation identified by Corncob (release 0.2.0) [43] with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.00001, as described in the Supplementary Materials (1.6). The ratios were constructed with a small constant (1) added to denominator and numerator read counts to account for excess zeros common in microbiome communities. Ratios screened and associated sequence variants of phylotypes are available in Supplementary Tables 2 and 8. Functional profiling of the metagenomes was performed using HUMAnN software version 3.0 [44]. Only metabolic pathways that were differential between the denominator and numerator groups’ genomes of type strains in compositional phylotype ratios were considered (Supplementary Table 7). 
Outcomes 
The primary outcome was the number of microbiologically defined infections, which required a positive laboratory result associated with clinical symptoms. Definitions for specific infection definitions can be found in the Supplementary Materials (1.8). Microbiologically defined infections included bacteremia, fungemia, urinary tract infection, viremia (adenovirus, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, human herpesvirus 6, BK virus), Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI), enterocolitis (adenovirus, rotavirus, norovirus, or Cryptosporidium), skin or mucosa lesions positive for herpes simplex virus and lower respiratory tract infection (eg, bacterial pneumonia, pulmonary aspergillus, or viral lower respiratory tract infection). Secondary outcomes included acute GVHD (aGVHD) (of any grade), bacteremia, CDI, and viral enterocolitis. 
Statistical Analysis 
Association between microbial community indices or phylotype ratios and outcomes were assessed with overall Cox proportional hazards multivariable regression models. Analyses of clinical outcomes are presented as hazard ratios (HRs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). For infection outcomes, adjustments in multivariable models were made for age, sex, and conditioning regimen (myeloablative or reduced intensity/nonmyeloablative). For aGVHD, additional adjustments in multivariable models were made for graft manipulation (T-cell depletion) and graft source (apheresis or bone marrow). To compare continuous and categorical microbiota features between groups, Wilcoxon rank-sum test and Fisher exact test were used, respectively. Microbiota composition was visualized with the t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) algorithm (Supplementary Materials 1.9). 
Data Sharing Statement 
Amplicon sequences and metagenomic sequences are publicly available under National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Short Read Archive (SRA) accession number PRJNA891765. 
RESULTS 
Characteristics of the Patients 
Seventy-four pediatric patients undergoing allo-HCT at St Jude Children's Research Hospital, who had stool samples collected prior to conditioning and at the time of engraftment, were included in this cohort. Patient characteristics are described in Table 1. The most common infections were viral enterocolitis, CDI, and bacteremia, each occurring in >30% of the participants. Severe aGVHD (grade 3–4) was rare and occurred in <20% of participants. The large range in age, conditioning regimens, antibiotic exposures, and graft sources contributed to considerable heterogeneity in the microbiomes of participants (Supplementary Figure 2). 
Microbiome Disruption Indices 
To characterize patterns of microbiota state in pediatric allo-HCT patients, we used 16S rRNA gene sequencing to analyze stool samples that had been collected prior to conditioning and subsequently, when neutrophil recovery had occurred. We investigated microbiome indices previously described as associated with adult allo-HCT outcomes and found that these indices were strongly dependent on patients’ age (Figure 1). To ensure appropriate benchmarking, we stratified these indices to age-matched healthy children (Supplementary Table 1). In contrast to adults, we did not find any association between low diversity or low butyrogens and clinical outcomes (Supplementary Table 3). 
Spectrum of Microbiome Compositional Attributes in Pediatric Transplantation
Microbiomes from individuals varied widely both at baseline and neutrophil recovery. When these differences were visualized using the t-SNE algorithm, there was no cluster of microbiota that discriminated the number of infections (Supplementary Figure 3). Diversity or other markers of microbiome disturbance (eg, bacterial load, butyrogens, dominance) were not associated with a particular composition (Supplementary Figure 3). 
Baseline Microbiota Predicts Specific Infections After Transplantation 
Microbiota composition varied widely between individuals (Supplementary Figure 2). To capture the unique taxa that predict outcomes, we applied a stringent screen (FDR = 0.00001) for phylotypes that varied in distribution and abundance across multiple individuals [43]. These phylotypes selected to form ratios may come from similar ecological niches within their communities. These ratios were queried to determine the relationship between the baseline gut microbiota prior to transplantation and subsequent development of infection (first year after transplant). We tested each of these phylotype ratios against all outcomes (Supplementary Table 5). After accounting for age, sex, and conditioning regimen, we found that a ratio of facultative and strict anaerobes (group 1 and 2; includes Rothia sp, Leuconostoc sp, and Anaerostipes butyraticus) predicted bacterial infections (Cox HR, 1.72 [95% CI, 1.25–2.37]). A distinct ratio of facultative and strict anaerobes (group 3 and 4; includes Enterocloster, Parabacteroides, and Clostridium spp) at baseline predicted bacteremias (Cox HR, 3.89 [95% CI, 2.10–7.21]), while viral enterocolitis could be predicted (Cox HR, 2.76 [95% CI, 1.75–4.36]) based on the ratio of specific butyrate-producing bacteria (group 5 and 6; includes Peptoniphilus, Anaerobutyricum, and Blautia spp). Results are shown in Figure 2. These phylotype ratios were linked to functional pathways involved in Lipopolysaccharide (group 5/6 and group 7/8) and anaerobic nucleotide (group 1/2) biosynthesis. 
Neutrophil Recovery Microbiota Predicts Specific Infections After Transplantation 
The relationship between gut microbiota at neutrophil recovery and subsequent development of infection (from engraftment through first year of transplant) was characterized with the same phylotype ratios. Surprisingly, none of the phylotype ratios that were predictive of infections in baseline microbiota were predictive at time of neutrophil recovery (Supplementary Table 6). However, after accounting for age, sex, and conditioning regimen, we found that at neutrophil recovery a distinct ratio of oral anaerobes (group 11; includes Veillonella and Rothia spp) and gut anaerobes (group 12; includes Romboutsia timonesis and Anaerobutyricum hallii) was predictive of bacterial infections (Cox HR, 1.81 [95% CI, 1.30–2.52]) and viral enterocolitis infections (Cox HR, 1.96 [95% CI, 1.38–2.79]). Another ratio of aerotolerant bacteria (group 13; includes Klebsiella pneumoniae and Ruminococcus gnavus) and strict anaerobes (group 14; includes Bacteroides xylanisolvens and Lactobacillus gasseri) was predictive of bacteremia (Cox HR, 2.25 [95% CI, 1.33–3.78]) at neutrophil recovery (Figure 3). These ratios are linked to differences in metagenomic copies of metabolic pathways (Supplementary Table 7), including vitamin K metabolism (groups 11/12 and 13/14), anaerobic hexose catabolism (group 11/12), and methanogenesis (group 11/12). 
Microbiota Signatures at Baseline and Neutrophil Recovery Predict Acute GVHD 
The relationship between the gut microbiota at baseline or neutrophil recovery and subsequent development of aGVHD was characterized. We found that ratios of Enterobacter species (group 9) to oral microbes (group 10: Prevotella and Staphylococcus spp) were predictive of aGVHD (any grade) at baseline (Cox HR, 1.65 [95% CI, 1.22–2.23]; see Figure 2), while at neutrophil recovery a ratio of lactate producers (group 15, includes Enterococcus dispar and Streptococcus sanguinis) to strict anaerobes (group 16, includes Blautia massiliensis and Bacteroides vulgatus) was predictive of aGVHD (any grade, Cox HR, 1.61 [95% CI, 1.21–2.16]; Figure 3). Arginine metabolism pathway (which differed between group 9 and 10) presence at baseline was predictive of aGVHD (any grade: Cox HR, 8.17 [95% CI, 2.77–24.07]; Supplementary Table 7). 
DISCUSSION 
We found that the intestinal microbiota in pediatric patients undergoing allo-HCT are highly variable but that compositional signatures predict both infectious and aGVHD outcomes. Despite prophylaxis and preemptive treatment, both infection and aGVHD remain serious complications of allo-HCT in pediatric recipients. In this study, particular phylogenetic ratios reflected the microbiota composition prior to conditioning and at neutrophil recovery that were associated with these clinical outcomes. 
Uniqueness of Pediatric Microbiomes 
It is striking that purported indicators of microbiota disruption (loss of diversity, domination by single taxa, low bacterial load, and loss of butyrogens) were neither as prominent in this pediatric cohort nor linked to outcomes, as has been the case in adult allo-HCT cohorts) [6, 7]. This may be due to age-specific differences in what shapes microbiota (eg, stronger founding effects, abundant butyrogens) in children or differences in resilience (eg, adapted to frequent changes in diet, developing immune systems, and more frequent antibiotic courses). Differences in methodology, such as using more sophisticated indices of diversity (eg, phylogenetic diversity) or stratification by age, may also account for the lack of association. Another possibility is that these indices in adults are identifying a subset of allo-HCT patients at high risk for poor outcomes for which a corresponding population does not exist in pediatric allo-HCT due to differences in clinical variables (eg, indications for transplantation; prior exposures to antimicrobials, chemotherapy, or radiation; intensity of conditioning regimen; T-cell depletion of grafts). Many larger-scale observational studies of the microbiome have detailed the interactions between microbial communities and pediatric allo-HCT [16, 21, 28], but few have examined outcomes [24, 25]. 
Significance of Phylotype Ratios and Infection 
Outcome We found only 1 phylotype ratio of oral anaerobes (eg, Veillonella and Rothia spp) and gut anaerobes (eg, R timonesis, A hallii) at neutrophil recovery, which was able to predict cumulative infections. While the viral, bacterial, fungal, and parasitic infections pathogeneses are distinct, there are multiple shared exposures (eg, delayed immune reconstitution, breakdown of gut mucosal barrier) that can lead to increased exposure/susceptibility to these infections. It is unclear if this ratio denotes a microbiome state that alters host response to infection or results from the shared exposures and disturbances that increase susceptibility to infections. The common thread for all the infections that were predicted by a distinct microbiome signature (eg, viral enterocolitis, bacteremia) was loss of gut epithelial architecture. There are already a few proposed mechanisms by which the gut microbiome can help maintain the integrity of the mucosal barrier including links with short chain fatty acid production and tight junction assembly [45, 46], shaping mesenteric lymph nodes and Peyer patches [47], and determining thickness of colon mucus [48]. An alternative is that these microbiota signatures represent expansion of microbes that have a competitive advantage in a damaged epithelial state. Interrogating how communities respond to changes induced by conditioning, radiation, and antibiotics should be integrated with investigations into the components of these signatures that contribute to protective impact on maintaining the integrity of the mucosal barrier. 
Distinct Microbiota Signatures at Different Time Points 
Prior to conditioning and at neutrophil recovery are 2 time points where interventions might be feasible. We found that a microbiota signature that predicts infections or aGVHD at 1 time point did not predict any outcomes at the other time point. This could be due to differences in the type and pathogenesis of early infections versus later infections over the time-course of pediatric allo-HCT. It is unclear if the predictive value of the baseline time point is more indicative of the composition at that time or the composition’s response (or resilience) to conditioning and antibiotic course while neutropenic. Another possibility is that microbiota–host relationships may be different before and after gut injury. This is supported by investigations of butyrate-producing bacteria being beneficial before but inhibiting healing after injury. This highlights that the nature of any intervention on the microbiome would require careful consideration of timing. Longitudinal studies will be integral in determining how the relationship between microbiome, host, and medical interventions influence clinical outcomes. 
Significance of Phylotype Ratios and Acute GVHD Outcome 
GVHD is a major cause of morbidity after pediatric allo-HCT and its treatment is a major risk factor for opportunistic infections. We found 2 microbiome signatures (1 at baseline and another at neutrophil recovery) that predicted the likelihood of aGVHD. The microbiome has a complicated relationship with aGVHD, as both gut decontamination [22, 26, 49] and highly diverse adult microbiomes [8, 50, 51] have been previously suggested to be protective. Our results suggest that in pediatric patients a more specific composition may be protective (which surprisingly includes the much-maligned Enterobacteriaceae) and highlight the need to investigate the middle ground between all and none. One potential distinction between pediatric and adult microbiome-GVHD associations is the reliance on peripheral tolerance in adult populations, whereas many children still have active thymic function (central tolerance). These and other differences in the immune system (eg, T-cell maturity and diversity) may alter the role that the microbiome plays in influencing aGVHD in pediatric populations. 
Caveats and Limitations 
The present cohort included a large range in age, underlying diseases, conditioning regimens, antibiotic exposures, and graft sources, which contributed to considerable overall heterogeneity. Nevertheless, we were able to observe parallel microbiota signatures and associations with clinical outcome that endured after controlling for some of these confounders. Another caveat to this study is that samples were analyzed by targeted amplicon sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene, which limited analysis to the bacterial component of the gut microbiome and has inherent biases within the classification methodology. In addition, multiple samples had to be excluded owing to the difficulty of obtaining and processing stool samples. Not all infectious outcomes could be individually investigated due to insufficient events occurring within this cohort. The phylotype ratios also originated from screening this cohort, so to ensure that these results are generalizable, multicenter studies will be necessary. Finally, the largest limitation of an observational study such as this is that only correlations can be revealed. Causative relationships will require further research with preclinical models of allogeneic transplantation, infection, or GVHD to demonstrate mechanisms by which microbial communities can modulate susceptibility. Correlations may still be valuable in providing a reliable method to identify which subsets of pediatric allo-HCT patients are at highest risk for infections in order to target prophylactic and preemptive treatment. 
Functional Context of Findings 
These findings that specific (and many unheralded) bacteria could predict infection and transplant complications in this pediatric cohort differs from what has been seen previously in adult cohorts. First, there was no relationship with diversity or potential butyrate producers. Second, these specific microbiome signatures may indicate that particular communities have metabolic differences, which could either be simply associated with the signatures or may provide hints to potential host–microbiome interactions. When we followed up functional differences associated with outcomes, we found that many of the infection microbiome signatures were suggestive of typical functions seen in beneficial protective anaerobic bacteria (eg, anaerobic nucleotide biosynthesis/salvage, vitamin K pathways, anaerobic hexose catabolism). However, we found 1 functional difference strongly predictive of aGVHD (and linked to the ratios): arginine biosynthesis (PWY-7400). Arginine bioavailability has been linked to deregulation of innate inflammation, altering M1/M2 macrophage subtype and regulation of nitric oxide levels [52]. 
Actionable 
This study highlights 2 timepoints—preconditioning and neutrophil recovery—which offer brief windows during which strategies to alter or remediate microbiota influences could be evaluated. More immediately evaluating microbiota at these time points could be used to stratify patient infection or aGVHD risk and target treatment or preemptive diagnostics. That consistent tractable patterns of microbiota composition were associated with clinical infectious disease outcomes highlights the potential associations between medical interventions, hosts, and microbial communities. In pediatric patients undergoing allo-HCT, these associations were observed across many different ages, underlying conditions, graft sources, and conditioning regimens despite individual differences in baseline microbiota composition. 