Daily Low-Dose Aspirin and Risk of Serious Falls and Fractures in Healthy Older People
Introduction
Falls and fractures are frequent, interrelated, and deleterious to older people threatening their confidence, independence, well-being, and survival. In the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017, estimates of burden of disease ranked falls 17th for the male population and 25th for the female population.1

Globally, more than 1.6 million hip fractures and 700 000 fall-related deaths (many of which involve fracture) occur annually.2 The majority of hip fractures (95%) in older adults are due to falls,3 and falls result in approximately 80% of traumatic brain injury–related hospital presentations and deaths in older adults.4 The burden of both falls and fractures is likely to escalate with population aging as the risks of both falls and fractures increase exponentially with age.5,6,7

Fragility fractures are the result of deterioration in bone volume and its microarchitecture produced by age-related and sex-hormone–related bone loss and falls. Falls result from a complex interaction of risk factors that are extrinsic—those relating to the environment such as an uneven surface—and intrinsic such as reduced lower limb strength and comorbidities.8,9,10,11 Aspirin may reduce bone fragility and falls by delaying bone loss.12,13,14 A systematic review of the literature reported that aspirin use was associated with 17% lower odds of fracture, although the association with bone mineral density was of marginal significance. Effects on bone microarchitecture are yet to be investigated.13 There have been no randomized controlled trials investigating the association between aspirin use and the risk of fractures in human subjects.

The ASPREE-FRACTURE substudy aimed to determine whether daily low-dose (100 mg) aspirin is associated with decreased incidence of any fracture in healthy women and men aged 70 years and older. The secondary aim was to assess whether any reduced fracture risk might be explained, in part, by reducing the risk of serious falls, defined as fall-related hospital presentations.

Go to:
Methods
Study Design and Setting
The ASPREE-FRACTURE substudy was a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial established as a substudy conducted in Australia within the Aspirin in Reducing Events in the Elderly (ASPREE) clinical trial. ASPREE, described in detail elsewhere,15 was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial that determined whether daily 100 mg enteric-coated (low-dose) aspirin prolonged disability-free and dementia-free survival in the primary prevention setting. Secondary end points of the ASPREE trial included the individual components of the primary end point (death from any cause, dementia, or persistent disability), as well as fatal and nonfatal cardiovascular disease (including stroke), fatal and nonfatal cancer, mild cognitive impairment, depression, and major hemorrhage (clinically significant bleeding and hemorrhagic stroke). ASPREE recruited 19 114 healthy older people living in the community from general medical practices across southeastern Australia and from 34 sites in the US. A detailed description of the protocol (Supplement 1) including end point definitions for the ASPREE study has been published previously,15 as have the primary and secondary outcomes.16,17,18

Ethics approvals were obtained from the Monash University Human Research Ethics Committee (MUHREC) for both the ASPREE principal trial (2006/745MC) and the ASPREE-FRACTURE substudy (CF14/1740 - 2014000872). This study is registered with the Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry (ACTRN12615000347561). The Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) reporting guideline was followed.

Participants
The ASPREE-FRACTURE substudy involved the 16 703 Australian participants recruited to the ASPREE principal trial. US participants were not included because of an inability to capture relevant documentation to verify fracture and serious fall events from a more dispersed population.

Participants were community-dwelling men and women, who were 70 years of age or older. Inclusion criteria included freedom from any chronic illness likely to limit survival to less than 5 years and from documented cardiovascular or cerebrovascular disease. Participants with a diagnosis of dementia or significant cognitive impairment (measured by a score equal to or less than 78 on the Modified Mini–Mental State Examination), a substantial physical disability (defined as more than some difficulty with any 1 of 6 basic activities of daily living, including dressing, eating, toileting, transferring, bathing, and walking), a known high risk of bleeding, a current indication for antithrombotic medication, or a contraindication to aspirin were excluded. A full list of the inclusion and exclusion criteria is in eBox in Supplement 2. Eligible participants who were approved by their medical practitioner and adhered to a 4-week run-in medication trial were enrolled in the study via written informed consent. Participants’ demographic variables and health measures were assessed at baseline and at annual in-person visits, with study assessments and procedures described in detail elsewhere.15,19

Randomization and Blinding
A computer-generated randomization schedule via the ASPREE web portal was used to randomize participants in a ratio of 1:1 to active aspirin or placebo therapy, stratified by recruitment site and by age (70-79 or =80 years). Participants, study staff, and the participant’s medical practitioner were blind to group allocation. After the randomization process, participants were seen face-to-face annually and direct telephone contact between the research staff and the participant was made every 3 to 6 months to encourage medication adherence and to collect additional clinical information. Full details of the data collection schedules for the primary ASPREE trial have been published previously.15

Intervention and Control
Participants in the intervention group received a daily dose of oral 100 mg enteric-coated (low-dose) aspirin. The control group received an enteric-coated white tablet with an identical appearance.

Outcomes
The primary outcome of the ASPREE-FRACTURE substudy was the occurrence of any fracture after randomization. Fractures included vertebral, hip, and other fractures (including both traumatic and pathological) that were confirmed by medical imaging undertaken as part of usual care after randomization.

The secondary outcome was serious falls defined as fall-related hospital presentations. Fall events were defined as an event which results in a person coming to rest inadvertently on the ground or floor or other lower level.20 Hospital presentations included both emergency department (ED) presentations (with or without resultant admission) and hospital admissions.

Possible fractures and falls were identified during the annual visit and 6-month telephone follow-up when participants were questioned on the occurrence of any attendances at an emergency room or hospital as part of the parent ASPREE study protocol. Notification of a potential fracture or fall event by a participant triggered the collection of information from hospitals, medical practices, and specialist medical records. Confirmation of the occurrence of a fracture or serious fall involved the collection of evidence from hospital admission notes, hospital discharge summaries, medical imaging reports (radiographic imaging, magnetic resonance imaging, computed tomography, and bone scans), emergency department progress notes, and death certificates. Only cases where confirmatory evidence was available from imaging or imaging reports were considered for inclusion as cases in the fracture analysis.

All potential outcomes were adjudicated by an end point adjudication committee, consisting of clinicians and research personnel blinded to group allocation. Two members of the end point adjudication committee adjudicated each outcome event with disagreements resolved by discussion and the involvement of a third adjudicator. The time of the fracture event (date of medical imaging that confirmed the fracture) and time of the fall event (date of fall-related hospital presentation) were recorded by the adjudicator.

With regard to other potential adverse events, given the size of the ASPREE population, and their advanced age, the number of these was too numerous to document in detail. Systematic documentation of adverse events (beyond the prespecified primary and secondary end points of the ASPREE trial) was limited to serious bleeding, which in multiple previous aspirin trials has been shown to be the predominant adverse effect of aspirin and has been the subject of a separate report.18

Statistical Analysis
Outcome analyses were undertaken on an intention-to-treat basis as per the published protocol.19 The time to first fracture was analyzed using Cox proportional hazards models to estimate cause-specific hazard ratios (HRs) with censoring at the end of a participant’s follow-up in the trial (ie, upon the earliest occurring of complete withdrawal, loss to follow-up, fracture event, death or the cessation of the intervention phase of the study). Cumulative incidence estimates were obtained by treating death as a competing risk. For the cause-specific Cox models, the proportional hazards assumption was examined using standard methods. The primary analysis was unadjusted.

A subsequent analysis was adjusted for the following characteristics at the time of randomization: age, use of medications that affect bone structure and mineralization, malignant neoplasm, alcohol intake, and smoking status. Treatment heterogeneity was assessed across a number of predefined subgroups: osteoarthritis, age group, gender, body mass index (BMI), alcohol use, smoking, frailty as defined by the Fried criteria,21 health status by self-report, use of medication affecting bone mineral density, and use of antihypertensives. Heterogeneity of treatment effect was tested based on subgroup-treatment interaction term in a Cox proportional hazards model. Confidence intervals and P values for subgroup analysis were not adjusted for multiple testing.

In a secondary analysis, we used the Anderson-Gill model with treatment as the only covariate to analyze all recurrent fracture events (first fracture and all subsequent fractures experienced by each participant). In this analysis, we censored participants at the end of their follow-up.

Serious falls were analyzed using negative binomial regression models, where the dependent variable was the total number of serious falls for all participants during the trial, while randomized group allocation was the independent variable, and length of the follow-up period per participant was the offset term. These models estimated incidence rate ratios comparing the rate of serious falls in the aspirin and placebo groups. Secondary analysis was adjusted for the same covariates as listed for fractures. Additionally, we performed several post hoc analyses of first serious fall and first serious fall with and without fracture, using Cox proportional hazards model with censoring at the end of a participant’s follow-up in the trial (ie, upon the earliest occurring of complete withdrawal, loss to follow-up, serious fall event, death or the cessation of the intervention phase of the study). When analyzing treatment effect on a fall type, the other fall type was treated as competing risk.

Statistical significance was assessed at a 2-sided P < .05. R statistical software, version 4.2.1 (R Project for Statistical Computing) was used for the data analysis. Data were analyzed from October 17, 2019, to August 31, 2022.

Go to:
Results
Recruitment took place from March 2010 to December 2014, with follow-up completed on June 12, 2017. Of 20 288 Australians assessed for eligibility, 16 703 consented to randomization with 8322 randomized to aspirin and 8381 to placebo. Participants were of median (IQR) age 74 (72-78) years, and 9179 (55.0%) were women. The median follow-up per person was 4.6 years resulting in 76 219 total person-years of follow-up; 1.2% withdrew, and 1.6% were lost to follow-up (Figure 1).
The participants were relatively healthy with an average BMI of 27, and only 3.4% reported they were current smokers. At entry, the majority (98.0%) reported no difficulty with walking or bathing as measured by the Katz Activities of Daily Living scale.22 Hypertension was common (75.0% of participants) as was osteoarthritis (56.3% of participants). Only 2379 (14.2%) participants reported their health status as excellent (eTable in Supplement 2).

Annual pill counts from returned bottles assessed medication adherence, which was 72.9% for those in the aspirin group and 74.3% for those in the placebo group throughout the trial in the whole cohort.16

Baseline characteristics, including self-reported history of a fractured bone as an adult prior to study recruitment (38.4% of participants), were well matched between the randomized groups (eTable in Supplement 2). The number of participants who withdrew or were lost to follow-up was also similar between groups. During the period of follow-up, 2865 fractures and 1688 serious falls were recorded. The distributions of fractures and serious falls between the randomized groups are shown in the Table.
Of all fracture events (as opposed to first), 1394 occurred in people assigned to aspirin and 1471 in people assigned to placebo (Table). No difference was seen in first (HR, 0.97; 95% CI, 0.87-1.06; P = .50) or recurrent fracture events (HR, 0.96 (95% CI, 0.87-1.06; P = .40). In the forest plot (Figure 2), no subgroups were identified with results substantially different from the results for all participants. The cumulative incidence curves for all fractures were virtually identical for those receiving aspirin or placebo (Figure 3A).
Serious Falls
A total of 750 (9.0%) individuals in the aspirin group experienced 884 serious falls during follow-up, while 687 individuals (8.2%) in the placebo group experienced 804 serious falls (incidence rate ratio, 1.17; 95% CI, 1.03-1.33; P = .01) (Table). The difference in the cumulative incidence curves for serious falls between the 2 groups was of borderline statistical significance (Figure 3B).

Those receiving aspirin experienced a greater number of serious falls, either single or multiple, which required hospital presentation, with or without accompanying fractures (Table). A forest plot indicated that the increased risk of first serious falls was similar for all of the subgroups examined, although the additional risk with aspirin use (which was not statistically significant) appeared greatest among underweight participants and those whose self-reported health status at entry was fair or poor (Figure 4).
Results for both fracture and serious falls remained unchanged in analyses that adjusted for covariates known to influence fracture and fall risk. In addition, results for fracture were also unchanged when restricted to hip, trauma-related, and nonpathological fractures as the outcome.

Go to:
Discussion
In this substudy of a clinical trial of community-dwelling older adults randomized 1:1 to either 100 mg/d of low-dose aspirin or placebo for a median of 4.6 years, those receiving aspirin were more likely to have a fall-related hospital presentation than controls receiving placebo. However, the incidence of fractures was similar between groups. This finding adds to evidence from the ASPREE principal trial which showed that, among these participants, the use of low-dose aspirin did not confer any advantage in terms of disability-free survival (a composite that integrated the risks and benefits of aspirin).16

The large sample size, high degree of participant retention, and near complete end point ascertainment lend credibility to the findings of this study. In addition, the broad any-fracture end point definition applied is a further strength. In line with recent expert recommendations, we included nonosteoporotic fractures in this analysis to avoid fracture classification errors and increase the generalizability of the findings.23 Prior studies highlight that the majority of fractures occur in individuals with normal or osteopenic T score.24 The findings of another study suggest that fragility contributes to all fractures including those arising from high trauma.25 Focusing on only osteoporotic fractures would reduce the study outcome sample size considerably, and therefore the power and generalizability.

To our knowledge, the current study is the first analysis of randomized placebo-controlled trial data on the effect of aspirin administration on incident fractures. The narrow CIs support the notion that any benefit (or detriment) above 15% would have been detected with this sample size.

The clinical significance of these results relates to the large percentage of the older population who are both at risk of fracture and are taking aspirin for the prevention of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease. Despite promising findings from both in vitro and observational studies, aspirin does not reduce the risk of fractures in healthy older people and is unlikely either to increase or decrease the community burden of fractures.

The increase in serious falls observed among those randomized to aspirin was not anticipated and might have resulted from either an increased tendency to fall or more substantial nonfracture injuries sustained as a consequence of falling. It was originally hypothesized that aspirin may decrease falls by slowing physical decline by reducing cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events through antiplatelet effects and/or reducing cognitive decline by protecting against Alzheimer disease and/or vascular dementia26—well-known fall risk factors. Recent studies by the ASPREE group show that daily low-dose aspirin did not reduce the risk of dementia, mild cognitive impairment, or cognitive decline.27 This may partially explain why this trial found no protective effect of aspirin on fall risk. The increase in serious fall risk was not accompanied by an increase in fractures, in keeping with a previous report suggesting that only 10% to 15% of falls in older people are accompanied by fractures.28 More likely, it may have resulted from more extensive bleeding or bruising after a fall leading to a need for more medical attention. Alternatively, an increase in the tendency to fall may have resulted from other aspirin-induced morbidities such as anemia.29 The greater risk of falls in the aspirin group was not attributable to any identified subgroup.

Limitations
There are some caveats affecting the conclusions. First, the study population was older and relatively healthy. It remains unknown if the same effects will be observed in a less healthy population, such as those at higher risk of osteoporosis or in racial and ethnic minority groups. Second, the duration of the intervention might have been insufficient to allow meaningful changes in fracture and fall risk to develop. Third, the dose of aspirin may have been too low to affect biochemical pathways that moderate bone remodeling. Fourth, bone density or other bone quality indicators were not measured, nor were other comorbidities such as rheumatoid arthritis and osteoporosis that may have influenced fracture and/or fall risk. None of these limitations are likely to modify the conclusions of the study.

The lack of an effect of low-dose aspirin on fracture risk is notable in the context of several in vitro studies suggesting that aspirin may promote the formation and life span of osteoblasts, impair osteoclast activity, and promote bone regeneration.12,14 A recent meta-analysis of observational data from 6 studies involving 511 390 participants reported long-term use of aspirin was associated with a reduced risk of any fracture.13 However, conclusions drawn from findings from observational studies may be unreliable due to potential confounding and measurement and/or reporting biases. For these reasons, the results of a more definitive randomized trial have been awaited to resolve the question.

Go to:
Conclusions
In this substudy of a randomized clinical trial, the lack of an effect of low-dose aspirin on the risk of fractures while increasing the risk of serious falls adds to the body of evidence that this agent provides little favorable benefit in a healthy, White older adult population.
