Novel Tissue Factor Inhibition for Thromboprophylaxis in COVID-19: Primary Results of the ASPEN-COVID-19 Trial
COVID-19, caused by SARS-CoV-2, has led to over 6 million deaths worldwide.1 Early COVID-19 studies demonstrated increased risk of thrombosis, including pulmonary micro- and macrothrombi, and nonpulmonary arterial and venous thrombi.2–5 This aggressive hypercoagulable state is characterized by elevated D-dimer levels, which is a predictor of thrombosis, severity of disease, and mortality in COVID-19.6 These observations led to numerous trials of thromboprophylaxis for COVID-19.7,8 Currently available anticoagulants, including heparin and factor Xa inhibitors, target the intrinsic and/or common pathway of the coagulation cascade. However, the pathophysiology of COVID-19 seems to be thrombo-inflammatory, involving not only coagulopathy involving the extrinsic pathway but also a severe inflammatory response resulting in thrombosis despite conventional anticoagulation.9–11

TF (tissue factor), a procoagulant protein, may play a role in the pathophysiology of COVID-19. TF complexed with activated factor VII initiates the extrinsic coagulation pathway and is an important mediator of thrombo-inflammation, including hypercoagulability associated with non–SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus infections.12,13 During viral infections, TF can promote inflammation and activate members of the protease activated receptor family that are important in inflammatory disorders such as sepsis.14 Incorporation of TF into the viral envelope and involvement in viral dissemination have been demonstrated in non–SARS-CoV-2 studies.15,16 In COVID-19, TF expression on circulating extracellular vesicles predicts patient prognosis and mortality,17–21 and its mRNA expression is upregulated in SARS-CoV-2 associated myocardial injury.22 Therefore, TF may represent a novel target to mitigate the viral-mediated hypercoagulability observed in COVID-19.

rNAPc2 (recombinant nematode anticoagulant protein c2), a small recombinant protein cloned from the saliva of the hematophagous hookworm Ancyclostoma caninum, is a potent and long-acting TF inhibitor with an elimination half-life in humans of 50 to 60 hours.23 Anticoagulation with rNAPc2 results from its binding first to factor X (or factor Xa) and then to the factor VIIa/TF catalytic complex, thereby inhibiting the extrinsic coagulation pathway. The mode of action of rNAPc2 is similar to that of tissue factor pathway inhibitor.24,25 In early phase clinical trials, rNAPc2 inhibited thrombin generation in patients with acute coronary syndrome and those undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention and prevented deep venous thrombosis in patients undergoing total knee arthroplasty, all without excess bleeding.23,26,27 In Ebola-infected nonhuman primates, treatment with rNAPc2 reduced D-dimer, inflammatory biomarker levels, viral load, and death.28 rNAPc2 also shows activity against Marburg virus,29 and reduced viral load with rNAPc2 treatment has been demonstrated in a murine model of herpes simplex virus 1.16

Modification of TF signaling by rNAPc2 in viral infection may provide unique antiviral benefits. TF signaling complexes have been shown to induce interferon-regulated transcriptional responses in dendritic cells and monocytes,30,31 and type I interferons play a pivotal role in antiviral immunity. When factor Xa is formed, rNAPc2 can stabilize a TF-factor VIIa-factor Xa complex, while retaining the capacity to elicit factor Xa-Proteinase-activated receptor-2 signaling mediated interferon responses.30 In contrast, rNAPc2 is a potent inhibitor of proangiogenic and profibrotic signaling by TF-factor VIIa.32,33 Thus, rNAPc2 may act as TF signaling modifier preventing adverse lung remodeling relevant for COVID-19 infection without impairment of antiviral immunity.

We thus hypothesized that rNAPc2 may improve outcomes in COVID-19 through anticoagulant and nonanticoagulant mechanisms. The ASPEN-COVID-19 (Assessing Safety, Hospitalization and Efficacy of rNAPc2 in COVID-19) Study was a phase 2b international, multicenter, prospective randomized, open-label blinded end point, active comparator trial designed to assess primarily safety and secondarily efficacy of rNAPc2 compared with heparin in patients hospitalized with COVID-19 at elevated risk of thrombosis. The main results of ASPEN-COVID-19 are reported herein.


METHODS
Trial Design and Oversight
The design of ASPEN-COVID-19 (NCT04655586) has been previously reported.34 The trial was sponsored by ARCA biopharma, Inc (Westminster, CO) and conducted in partnership with CPC Clinical Research (Aurora, CO), a nonprofit Academic Research Organization affiliated with the University of Colorado. International trial operations were conducted by Estudios Clínicos Latinoamérica (Rosario, Argentina), Academic Research Organization-Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein (São Paulo, Brazil), and Atlantis Clinical (São Paulo, Brazil). All analyses were performed independently at CPC. ASPEN-COVID-19 data will not be made publicly available. The authors are responsible for the study design and conduct and manuscript drafting, editing, and final contents.

Trial Participants
A broadly representative sample of patients hospitalized with COVID-19 at elevated thrombotic risk was targeted for enrollment. Eligibility criteria included age 18 to 90 years, weight =50 kg, hospitalization for COVID-19 (without restrictions on critical versus noncritical status), and elevated D-dimer above the local laboratory upper limit of normal (Table S1). Key exclusion criteria included high bleeding risk (eg, recent surgery, concomitant use of dual antiplatelet therapy), significant renal impairment, inability to receive heparin, and estimated life expectancy <72 hours. Baseline severity of illness was categorized as mild or severe according to the World Health Organization ordinal clinical progression scale (Table S2).35

The study was conducted in accordance with all local laws and regulations and ethical principles of the Declaration of Helsinki according to International Council on Harmonization Good Clinical Practice guidelines. The protocol and informed consent were reviewed and approved by corresponding health authorities, Institutional Review Boards, and Ethics Committees for participating sites. Enrolled subjects provided informed consent for study participation.

Randomization and Treatment
Participants were randomized 1:1:2 to higher dose rNAPc2 (7.5 µg/kg by subcutaneous injection on day 1 and 5 µg/kg on days 3 and 5) approximating therapeutic anticoagulation,26 lower-dose rNAPc2 (5 µg/kg on day 1 and 3 µg/kg on days 3 and 5) providing prophylactic anticoagulation,26 or heparin (low-molecular weight or unfractionated) administered according to local standard of care (Figure ?(Figure1).1). Permuted block randomization stratified by screening D-dimer concentration (= or >2× the local laboratory upper reference limit) was used; sites were uninformed of block size. Participants assigned to rNAPc2 could transition to standard heparin thromboprophylaxis per local standard of care starting on day 8. Treatment with therapies approved for COVID-19, including antiviral and anti-inflammatory therapies, was allowed.
Blood Collection and Assays
Blood samples were obtained for central laboratory analysis of biomarker end points on days 1 (before first study drug administration), 2, 3, 8 (or day of discharge if before day 8), and 30. D-dimer was measured using a latex-based immuno-agglutination assay (Instrumentation Laboratory, Lexington, MA). TF activity was assessed using a colorimetric assay (Abcam, Inc, Cambridge, MA). High sensitivity C-reactive protein and IL-6 (interleukin-6) were measured at Pharmaceutical Product Development (PPD; Wilmington, NC). Please see the Major Resources Table in the Supplemental Material.

Study End Points
Objectives of this Phase 2b study were first to establish the safety of and, second, identify an efficacy signal for rNAPc2 relative to heparin in patients hospitalized with COVID-19. Patients were followed through day 30, which was considered the end of study. The primary safety end point was International Society of Thrombosis and Haemostasis major or nonmajor clinically relevant bleeding through day 8 (or day of discharge if earlier than day 8),36 comparing pooled higher+lower dose rNAPc2 against heparin. The primary efficacy end point was proportional change in D-dimer level from baseline to day 8 (or day of discharge if before day 8, henceforth referred to as day 8) comparing pooled dose rNAPc2 versus heparin. TF activity and prothrombin time were prespecified pharmacodynamic end points, and thrombotic clinical events, including pulmonary embolism, deep vein thrombosis, myocardial infarction, stroke, acute limb ischemia, and other systemic thromboembolic events, and inflammatory biomarkers were exploratory end points. All clinical safety and efficacy events were adjudicated according to prespecified definitions by a Clinical Events Committee unaware of group assignments. An independent Data and Safety Monitoring Committee was responsible for monitoring the safety of study participants throughout the trial. An interim analysis for safety was conducted after enrollment of 25 participants, after which continuation of the trial was recommended.

Statistical Considerations
A sample size of 100 subjects was originally planned to provide ˜90% power for a pooled dose rNAPc2 versus heparin comparison assuming a standardized group-mean difference (Cohen’s d) for change in D-dimer levels of 0.67 and 2-sided type 1 error of 5%. Due to changes in background therapy occurring during trial conduct that could affect the primary D-dimer end point or modulate disease severity, such as vaccines, corticosteroids, and remdesivir, as well as to ensure adequate and evaluable primary end point data, the sample size was increased to 160 subjects. This sample size with 130 evaluable subjects was calculated to have 83% power to detect =25% percent reduction in D-dimer comparing pooled dose rNAPc2 versus heparin for the primary efficacy end point.

Safety analyses were conducted on patients receiving at least 1 dose of study drug and analyzed according to actual drug received. Efficacy analyses were conducted on all randomized patients using the principle of intention-to-treat. Per protocol analyses were performed among randomized patients receiving 3 doses of rNAPc2 or heparin per standard of care through day 7 without major protocol deviations affecting the primary end point.

The primary efficacy end point, proportional change in D-dimer, represented by percent change, was based on data provided by the central laboratory paired samples. To reduce missing data, paired local laboratory values were used if central laboratory values were not available. The primary efficacy analysis was a comparison of the pooled rNAPc2 dose group versus heparin. Each rNAPc2 dose group was also compared with the heparin group and pooled and by-dose group comparisons of rNAPc2 to heparin were conducted according to severity of disease in prespecified analyses. Wilcoxon signed rank tests were used to compare baseline versus day 8 values within each treatment group, and Wilcoxon rank sum tests were used to compare proportional change from baseline to day 8 between treatment groups. The primary outcome was tested at a 2-sided significance level of 5%. Analyses were conducted by CPC Clinical Research using SAS version 9.4 (Cary, NC).


RESULTS
Enrollment and Follow-Up
From December 2020 through November 2021, 160 participants were randomized at 24 sites in 3 countries (Figure ?(Figure2).2). A total of 156 patients (97.5%) received at least 1 dose of study medication. Of these, 2 (2.6%) in the rNAPc2 group and 3 (3.8%) in the heparin group discontinued treatment prematurely. At trial completion, no patient was lost to follow-up, and vital status was available for all patients.
Baseline Characteristics
Baseline characteristics are shown in the Table. Overall, patients were a median of 54 (interquartile range [IQR], 46–65) years old, 43.1% female, 21.7% Hispanic or Latino, and 21.3% Black. A total of 51.3% had a history of hypertension, 35.6% had a history of diabetes, and 35.2% were current or former smokers. Almost 20% of patients were vaccinated against SARS-CoV-2, and 38.8% had severe COVID-19 (35.0% of lower-dose rNAPc2 patients, 45.0% of higher-dose rNAPc2 patients). Over half of patients were enrolled with a screening D-dimer >2-fold the upper limit of normal; median values in rNAPc2 and heparin groups were 320 ng/mL D-dimer unit (DDU; IQR, 219–547) and 339 ng/mL DDU (IQR, 220–524), respectively. Among 80 patients randomized to heparin, 87.5% (n=70) were treated with low-molecular weight heparin, 12.5% (n=10) were treated with unfractionated heparin, 92.5% (n=74) received prophylactic dose, and 8% (n=6) received therapeutic dose heparin. Baseline concomitant therapies for COVID-19 are shown in Table S3. Almost all patients were treated with systemic corticosteroids, and the majority received remdesivir.
Pharmacodynamics
Pharmacodynamic assessments at baseline and day 8 were performed. There was significant prolongation of prothrombin time with rNAPc2 (median, 17.5 seconds; IQR, 3.9–27.4; P<0.0001) but not heparin (median, 0.0 seconds; IQR, -5.5 to 5.3; P=0.83) from baseline to day 8. In the overall study sample, baseline median levels of TF activity in the pooled dose rNAPc2 and heparin groups were 335.2 and 355.6 pM, respectively. Treatment with rNAPc2 resulted in a significant median 20.3% reduction (P=0.0014) in TF activity (Figure S1). No change in TF activity was observed with heparin (median, -1.1%; P=0.58). When assessed by dose, there was a significant decrease in TF activity with lower-dose rNAPc2 (median, -25.1%; P=0.002); a similar reduction with higher dose rNAPc2 was not observed (median, -13.1%; P=0.15). Subgroup analysis according to severity of disease showed that treatment with rNAPc2 significantly decreased TF activity among patients with mild (median, -30.0%; P=0.0003) but not severe COVID-19 (median, -10.0%; P=0.37). This pattern remained consistent when stratified by dose.

Primary Safety End Point (International Society of Thrombosis and Haemostasis Bleeding)
There was 1 International Society of Thrombosis and Hemostasis major or nonmajor clinically relevant bleeding event through day 8, which occurred in a patient assigned to heparin and 1 International Society of Thrombosis and Haemostasis not clinically relevant bleed in a patient assigned to rNAPc2. Adverse events are shown in Table S4. Rates of treatment-emergent serious adverse events were similar between treatment groups (31.6% with rNAPc2 and 22.5% with heparin, P=0.21). Treatment-emergent serious adverse events deemed related to study drug were rare (3 rNAPc2 [2 higher dose, 1 lower dose], 1 heparin).

Primary Efficacy End Point (Change in D-Dimer)
Paired D-dimer laboratory values were available for 135 patients: 65 (81.3%) patients assigned to rNAPc2 (43 central, 22 local values) and 70 (87.5%) patients assigned to heparin (50 central, 20 local values). In the overall study sample (Figure ?(Figure3A),3A), there were nonsignificant within-group decreases in D-dimer from baseline to day 8 for pooled dose rNAPc2 (median, -16.8%; IQR, -45.7 to 36.8; P=0.41) and heparin (median, -11.2% [-36.0 to 34.4]; P=0.91); the between treatment group difference was not statistically significant (P=0.47). Per protocol analyses yielded similar results. Greater reduction in D-dimer level was observed among patients assigned to lower dose rNAPc2 (median, -25.2%; IQR, -48.9 to 13.0) than higher dose rNAPc2 (median, -10.2; IQR, -42.7 to 39.5; P>0.05 for differences in D-dimer change between rNAPc2 doses and each rNAPc2 dose versus heparin). Among severely ill patients (Figure ?(Figure3B),3B), D-dimer levels tended to increase more from baseline to day 8 in the heparin group (median, 29.0% [-14.9 to 145.2]; P=0.02) than the pooled rNAPc2 group (median, 25.9% [-49.1 to 136.4]; P=0.14), although the difference in changes between groups was not significantly different (P=0.96). Among patients with mild illness (Figure ?(Figure3C),3C), D-dimer levels were significantly reduced within each treatment group (rNAPc2 median, -32.7% [-44.7 to 4.3]; P=0.007 and heparin median, -16.8% [-36.0 to 0.5]; P=0.008). Although greater reduction in D-dimer with rNAPc2 than heparin was observed, this was not statistically significant (P=0.34).
Proportional change in D-dimer from baseline to different time points through day 8 are shown in Figure ?Figure4.4. The median change in D-dimer among patients assigned to heparin fluctuated and increased at day 5 compared with baseline. In contrast, a decreasing pattern in D-dimer with rNAPc2 treatment through day 5, the last dose of study drug, was observed (P=0.08).
Thrombotic Events
A total of 15 thrombotic events occurred within 30 days of randomization. Numerically fewer events were observed in patients treated with rNAPc2 than heparin (6 [3 lower dose, 3 higher dose] versus 9; P=0.44). The majority of thrombotic events occurred among patients with severe COVID-19 (6 rNAPc2 versus 8 heparin); among patients with mild COVID-19, there were no thrombotic events in the rNAPc2 group and 1 thrombotic event in the heparin group. Of the 15 total thrombotic events, 40% (n=6) were pulmonary embolism, 27% (n=4) were deep vein thrombosis, 20% (n=3) were myocardial infarction, and 13% (n=2) were stroke.

Biomarkers
Inflammatory biomarkers were examined among treatment groups. Levels of C-reactive protein decreased significantly from baseline to day 8 in both rNAPc2 (median, -81.9%; P=0.0002) and heparin (median, -84.7%; P=0.03) groups (between group P>0.99). IL-6 levels trended lower in both groups with a numerically greater trend in the heparin group (rNAPc2 median, -5.3%; P=0.13; heparin median, -39.5%; P=0.86; between group P=0.03).


DISCUSSION
In this international randomized phase 2b trial of hospitalized patients with COVID-19, treatment with the novel TF inhibitor rNAPc2 was safe, with no signal for increased risk of bleeding or adverse events compared with heparin. However, change in D-dimer levels from baseline to day 8 or pre-day 8 discharge was not significantly different with rNAPc2 versus heparin.

These results should be interpreted in the context of several important considerations. When ASPEN-COVID-19 was designed, effective COVID-19 therapies had not yet been demonstrated. Subsequent studies led to widespread use of treatments, including dexamethasone,37 remdesivir,38 baricitinib,39 tocilizumab,40 and convalescent plasma,41 and SARS-CoV-2 vaccines were also developed. Such therapies might affect D-dimer levels and reduce trial power to detect the effect of rNAPc2 on the primary efficacy end point. rNAPc2 was also tested against an active comparator, heparin, which has itself been associated with D-dimer reduction in COVID-19.42 Furthermore, while elevated D-dimer levels are traditionally regarded as a marker of hypercoagulability and hyperfibrinolysis, in COVID-19, studies have demonstrated paradoxical evidence of impaired fibrinolysis.43,44 Taken together, these factors may have contributed to challenges in testing the effect of rNAPc2 on D-dimer concentrations in COVID-19 and in the use of D-dimer as a therapeutic effect biomarker.

After enrollment began, completed COVID-19 anticoagulation trials suggested heterogeneity of effect according to severity of disease. Therapeutic versus prophylactic heparin improved outcomes and prolonged survival without need for organ support among noncritically ill but not critically ill patients hospitalized with COVID-19.45,46 Similarly, therapeutic anticoagulation with enoxaparin reduced major thromboembolism and death compared with standard heparin thromboprophylaxis among noncritically ill patients, whereas the treatment effect was not observed among critically ill patients.47 These findings suggest that perhaps patients with severe disease have ongoing thrombo-inflammation that is beyond modification with anticoagulant therapies. We therefore examined the effect of rNAPc2 on D-dimer levels according to severity of disease. Among severely ill patients, no D-dimer reduction with rNAPc2 or heparin was observed. Among non-severe patients, D-dimer levels decreased in both treatment groups, with an almost 2-fold greater reduction observed with rNAPc2 compared with heparin. Although this difference did not meet statistical significance, likely related to small numbers and greater than anticipated variability in D-dimer levels, the findings raise the possibility there may be greater effect of rNAPc2 among less sick patients with COVID-19, consistent with what has been observed with heparin. The lack of dose-response of rNAPc2 on D-dimer reduction and significant reduction in TF activity observed with lower but not higher dose rNAPc2 may also be related to a greater proportion of patients with severe COVID-19 randomized to higher dose rNAPc2.

Additionally, greater reduction in IL-6 was observed with heparin compared with rNAPc2 treatment. IL6 is not selectively induced by direct TF signaling but also by thrombin. Although there is ample evidence that TF is upregulated in severe COVID-19,17–21 inflammation and coagulopathy are also amplified by immuno-thrombotic mechanisms. The potentially more efficient inhibition of IL6 levels by heparin could reflect the induction of this inflammatory mediator by several coagulation mechanisms converging on thrombin generation.

These phase 2b results support further investigation into potential clinical use of rNAPc2. rNAPc2 was safe and well tolerated. The frequency of adverse events, which was similar between treatment groups, speaks to the severity of illness of patients hospitalized with COVID-19. Thrombotic events were also frequent but not more common with rNAPc2 than with heparin, an effective thromboprophylaxis agent. Ongoing thrombosis, inflammation, and viral dissemination in spite of current treatments may contribute to persistent thromboembolic risk in COVID-19.7,8,48 Observations of pathogenic antiphospholipid antibodies operating through TF may help to explain longer-term thrombotic risk associated with SARS-CoV-2.49,50 rNAPc2 is a novel candidate therapeutic that may affect thrombo-inflammation and may mitigate thrombotic risk associated with COVID-19, although the current study was a small, phase 2b trial not designed to test this hypothesis. Data from ASPEN-COVID-19 raise the possibility of an effect of rNAPc2 on the surrogate outcome of D-dimer biomarker while on-treatment (eg, through day 5), which may inform future studies with respect to treatment duration that may need to be longer. Importantly, given the continued thrombotic risk observed in patients treated with rNAPc2 or heparin, the different mechanisms of action, and the lack of safety concerns, combination therapy with both agents could be considered.

Beyond COVID-19, our results support further investigation of rNAPc2 in disease states hypothesized to have TF-driven pathophysiology. For example, there may be benefit in cancer-associated thrombosis and cytokine storm associated with oncological therapies. Recurrent venous thromboembolism despite available anticoagulants and antiphospholipid syndrome are other settings in which therapeutic potential for TF inhibition may exist.

Limitations
This study has important limitations. Given the observed variability in D-dimer levels, the trial was underpowered to detect a statistically significant decrease in D-dimer with rNAPc2. Changing background therapies, including ubiquitous use of dexamethasone, could have obscured an effect of rNAPc2, as D-dimer was reduced in both groups. Additionally, this was an international study, and there was likely regional variability in COVID-19 treatment. Other trial data suggest heterogeneity of effect for anticoagulation according to severity of disease which was also observed in ASPEN-COVID-19. Specifically, the median reduction in D-dimer with rNAPc2 was nearly twice that of heparin among patients with mild disease, a pattern not observed in the severe subgroup. The analysis of temporal trends in change in D-dimer was exploratory, as decisions to assess D-dimer on day 5 were made by the clinical care team and may have reflected changes in patient clinical status. Finally, tissue factor activity was measured using a commercially available assay, and these data should be interpreted within the context of the assay’s performance characteristics.

Conclusions
Among patients hospitalized with COVID-19, TF inhibition with rNAPc2 as the only anticoagulant was safe and well tolerated but did not significantly reduce D-dimer levels more than heparin standard of care. These findings regarding safety support further investigation into potential use of rNAPc2 in disease states for which underlying pathophysiology is related to TF. The different mechanisms of action and acceptable safety profiles in a setting where thrombotic events persisted suggest that rNAPc2 and heparin could be used in combination in high-risk thrombo-inflammatory disorders.
