Modified-release nicotinamide for the treatment of hyperphosphataemia in 
haemodialysis patients: 52-week efficacy and safety results of the phase 3 
randomized controlled NOPHOS trial.

INTRODUCTION
Hyperphosphataemia in end-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients is associated with increased cardiovascular and all-cause mortality [1–7]. Consequently, the Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) guidelines suggest lowering serum phosphate concentrations to a normal range (2.5–4.5 mg/dl) [8]. In clinical practice, however, most haemodialysis (HD) patients exceed the recommended target range for serum phosphate despite receiving the standard of care that mainly consists of dietary and pharmacological [i.e. phosphate binder (PB)] intervention [9, 10].

Intestinal phosphate absorption is mediated via passive paracellular and active transcellular pathways. Three sodium-dependent phosphate cotransporters—NaPi-IIb, PiT-1 and PiT-2—play an important role in active transcellular phosphate transport in mammals, although their relative contributions are unknown [11–13]. Nicotinamide (NA) inhibits intestinal phosphate absorption, presumably by reducing the expression of NaPi-IIb [11, 14, 15]. Several small studies with short durations (8–24 weeks) showed that NA—either as monotherapy or in combination with PBs—effectively lowers serum phosphate concentrations in dialysis patients with hyperphosphataemia [10, 16–22]. A recent study found that NA as an add-on therapy to calcium-based PBs can further reduce serum phosphate concentrations in HD patients (n = 98) over a treatment period of 52 weeks [23]. However, long-term follow-up studies with large patient populations are lacking.

To address this gap, the NOPHOS trial investigated the 52-week efficacy and safety of modified-release NA (NAMR) as an add-on therapy to PBs in a large cohort of HD patients with hyperphosphataemia. We previously reported the results of the first 12 weeks of the study [24]. The confirmatory analysis demonstrated the superiority of NAMR over placebo in reducing serum phosphate concentrations after 12 weeks of treatment, with a significant between-group difference of −0.51 mg/dl [95% confidence interval (CI) −0.72 to −0.29; P < .001] in favour of NAMR. Here we report the 52-week efficacy and safety outcomes.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
The study design and methods of the NOPHOS trial have previously been published [24]. The trial was approved by the relevant regulatory authorities and institutional review boards. The trial was conducted in accordance with the principles of the International Council for Harmonization, respective national drug laws and the Declaration of Helsinki and was registered in the European Union Clinical Trials Register (EudraCT no. 2013-000488-95). All patients gave written informed consent to participate in the study.

Briefly, NOPHOS was a multicentre, randomized, prospective, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group trial conducted from November 2013 to March 2017 in Germany, Poland and Austria. The study enrolled adult patients on maintenance HD (three times a week) with a serum phosphate concentration of >4.5 and <8.7 mg/dl, who were under treatment with one or two PBs at a stable dose for at least 1 month before screening. Patients additionally receiving stable therapy with vitamin D analogues or calcimimetics for at least 1 month before screening were also eligible.

Patients entered the study while remaining on their individual PBs and were randomized 3:1 to treatment with NAMR or placebo for 52 weeks. NAMR and placebo were given once daily before bed at a dose of one to six capsules. For NAMR (250 mg capsules), this corresponds to 250–1500 mg/day. Patients received a stable dose of two capsules for the first 2 weeks; after week 2, the daily dose could be adjusted at every visit based on efficacy and tolerability. During the first 12 weeks of the study, investigators were advised to keep the doses of relevant concomitant medications (PBs, calcimimetics, calcitriol and vitamin D analogues) stable, whereas changes in these medications were allowed during the further course of the study. Patients who permanently discontinued the intake of study medication were asked to remain in the study for further follow-up.

Efficacy and safety assessments
The results for the primary endpoint [serum phosphate at week 12 in the intention-to-treat (ITT) population] and several secondary endpoints at week 12 have previously been published [24].

Here we report further secondary endpoints including absolute values as well as changes from baseline values at weeks 24 and 52 for serum phosphate, calcium, intact parathyroid hormone (iPTH), high-density lipoprotein (HDL), low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and triglycerides. Secondary analyses also included the number of patients receiving rescue therapy due to elevated or reduced serum phosphate, i.e. patients with a reduction of study medication dose or patients with an increase in PB dose/addition of a further PB, respectively. All secondary efficacy analyses were performed descriptively on the ITT population as well as the completer population, which was defined post hoc and included all patients for whom serum phosphate concentrations were available at week 52 and who completed the follow-up period under the treatment with NAMR or placebo. Compliance was assessed after database closure by analysis of individual serum concentrations of the terminal NA metabolites N-methyl-2-pyridone-5-carboxamide (2PY) and nicotinamide N-oxide (NNO) at screening and weeks 12, 24, and 52. A patient was considered compliant if both the serum 2PY and NNO concentrations at week 52 exceeded defined cut-off values (2PY: 24 200 µg/l; NNO: 25.6 µg/l). These cut-off values correspond to the respective median serum concentrations documented in patients of the NAMR group (per-protocol population) with an actual dose of one capsule per day at week 12.

Safety assessments included standard adverse event (AE) reporting and safety laboratory. All AEs occurring during the study were documented, including those that occurred in patients who had permanently discontinued study medication. Safety laboratory measurements were performed at screening and weeks 12, 24 and 52.

Statistical analysis
Analyses of absolute and change from screening values for serum phosphate, calcium and iPTH at weeks 12, 24 and 52 were performed in the ITT and completer populations. Missing data were not imputed in the secondary endpoints of the ITT population. Endpoints were analysed using the Mann–Whitney U test for continuous variables and Monte Carlo estimation of exact chi-squared P-values for binary or nominal variables. In a post hoc analysis, the time course of the serum phosphate concentration in the ITT population was assessed based on a longitudinal analysis using a linear mixed model with maximum likelihood estimator. This longitudinal analysis was also performed for subgroups of patients with a baseline serum iPTH concentration below and above the median baseline serum iPTH concentration (248 pg/ml). AEs were coded using the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA, versions 16.1 and higher). For frequent AEs (affecting ≥5% of patients in either treatment group), hazard ratios (HRs) with 95% CIs were estimated using the Andersen–Gill model [25, 26] to consider the recurrent nature of the AEs. No adjustment for multiple testing has been made. All statistical analyses were conducted using SAS statistical software (version 9.4; SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA) and R software (version 3.3.2 or higher; https://www.r-project.org/). Details on randomization, blinding, sample size and multivariate analysis of the primary endpoint, including the imputation of missing data, have already been published [24].

RESULTS
Participant flow
A detailed participant flow diagram has previously been published [24]. The ITT population (N = 722) consisted of 539 patients in the NAMR group and 183 patients in the placebo group. The safety population included 723 patients (NAMR: n = 540; placebo: n = 183). The completer population consisted of 251 patients in the NAMR group and 107 patients in the placebo group. The most common reasons for not including patients in the completer population were withdrawal from the study, discontinuation of study medication and missing serum phosphate at week 52 despite attending the week 52 visit.

Baseline characteristics
Baseline (i.e. screening) demographic and clinical characteristics were well balanced between the treatment groups in both the ITT and completer populations (Supplementary data, Table S1). The mean ± standard deviation (SD) age of the ITT population was 61.8 ± 13.9 years; 63.0% of patients were male. Baseline serum concentrations of phosphate, calcium, and iPTH were also comparable between the treatment groups in both the ITT and completer populations (Table 1). The baseline mean serum phosphate concentration in the ITT population was 6.03 ± 0.91 mg/dl in the NAMR group and 6.02 ± 0.85 mg/dl in the placebo group. Further baseline laboratory parameters are shown in Supplementary data, Table S2.
Dosing and exposure
Patients randomized to NAMR used a lower mean daily capsule count of study medication compared with patients randomized to placebo at weeks 12, 24 and 52 (Supplementary data, Table S3). The mean daily capsule count throughout the entire study period was 3.3 ± 1.2 capsules (825 ± 300 mg) in the NAMR group and 4.0 ± 1.2 capsules (1000 ± 300 mg) in the placebo group (P < .001).

The mean duration of exposure to study medication was significantly lower for patients in the NAMR group compared with patients in the placebo group (237 days versus 269 days; P = .02). The median duration of exposure was 309 days in the NAMR group and 364 days in the placebo group. The total observation time was 161.0 patient years in the placebo group and 466.4 patient years in the NAMR group with 347.5 patient years under NAMR treatment.

Efficacy
Phosphate and other markers of mineral metabolism (calcium, iPTH) As previously reported, the confirmatory analysis yielded a statistically significant treatment effect in the ITT population at week 12 [24]. Serum phosphate was also significantly lower in the NAMR group compared with the placebo group at week 24 (NAMR: 5.40 ± 1.55 mg/dl versus placebo: 5.79 ± 1.37 mg/dl; P < .001) with a mean difference of −0.39 mg/dl (95% CI −0.66 to −0.13). At week 52, serum phosphate was comparable between the treatment groups [NAMR: 5.66 ± 1.51 mg/dl versus placebo: 5.75 ± 1.49 mg/dl; P = .44; mean difference −0.08 (95% CI −0.36–0.20)] (Table 1). Figure 1 shows the time course of serum phosphate in the ITT population based on a longitudinal analysis using a linear mixed model with maximum likelihood estimator. In the completer population, serum phosphate was significantly lower in the NAMR group compared with the placebo group at weeks 12, 24 and 52 (Table 1). Changes from baseline values for serum phosphate are shown in Supplementary data, Table S4.
Differential changes in serum calcium and iPTH between the treatment groups are shown in Table 1 and Supplementary data, Table S4. In both the ITT and completer populations, a transient decrease in serum iPTH was observed in the NAMR group, whereas a gradual increase in serum iPTH was observed in the placebo group.

Use of rescue therapy The percentage of patients receiving rescue therapy due to elevated or reduced serum phosphate differed between the treatment groups. Rescue therapy due to reduced serum phosphate was used more often in the NAMR group [NAMR: 19.0% (n = 102) versus placebo: 15.8% (n = 29)], whereas rescue therapy due to elevated serum phosphate was used more often in the placebo group [NAMR: 9.5% (n = 51) versus placebo: 16.4% (n = 30)]. The difference in rescue therapy use between the treatment groups was statistically significant (P = .03).
Impact of secondary hyperparathyroidism (iPTH) on efficacy Figure 2 shows the time course of serum phosphate in patients with low and high baseline serum iPTH concentrations [i.e. below and above the median baseline serum iPTH concentration (248 pg/ml)] based on a longitudinal analysis using a linear mixed model with maximum likelihood estimator. NAMR treatment was associated with an initial decrease in serum phosphate in both subgroups, although the decrease was slightly lower in patients with high baseline serum iPTH. A sustained treatment effect was observed in patients with low baseline serum iPTH, whereas the treatment effect gradually diminished over time in patients with high baseline serum iPTH.
Impact of compliance on efficacy Figure 3A shows the time course of serum phosphate in the completer population. To assess whether a decrease in compliance may have contributed to the observed increase in serum phosphate in the NAMR group in the second half of the study, patients of the completer population were classified as either compliant or non-compliant based on the serum concentrations of the NA metabolites 2PY and NNO. The compliance rate at week 52 was 70.6%. Compliant patients had consistently high serum 2PY/NNO concentrations throughout the entire study period. In contrast, non-compliant patients had a transient and only moderate increase in metabolite concentrations (Fig. 3B).
Figure 3C shows the time course of serum phosphate for compliant and non-compliant patients of the NAMR group; for reference, the data for the overall NAMR group and placebo group are also included. Serum phosphate at baseline was slightly lower in compliant patients compared with non-compliant patients (compliant: 5.92 ± 0.91 mg/dl versus non-compliant: 6.05 ± 1.05 mg/dl). At week 2, serum phosphate was reduced in both subgroups (compliant: 5.34 ± 1.18 mg/dl versus non-compliant: 5.48 ± 1.63 mg/dl). In non-compliant patients, serum phosphate remained at a constant level until week 20 but increased thereafter—reaching placebo levels at week 24. In contrast, serum phosphate further decreased in compliant patients and remained low throughout the entire study, although it slightly increased at the end of the study (week 12: 5.05 ± 1.13 mg/dl; week 24: 5.00 ± 1.32 mg/dl; week 52: 5.32 ± 1.23 mg/dl).

Lipid analyses Supplementary data, Table S2 shows results for the lipid analyses. Mean HDL concentrations increased in the NAMR group, resulting in significant differences between the treatment groups at weeks 12, 24 and 52. Mean LDL concentrations decreased in both treatment groups. Mean triglyceride concentrations decreased over time in both treatment groups, although the decrease was more pronounced in the NAMR group, with significant differences between the treatment groups at weeks 12, 24 and 52.
Safety
Overview of AEs Overall, 4244 AEs were reported for 517 (95.7%) patients in the NAMR group and 1063 AEs were reported for 163 (89.1%) patients in the placebo group (P = .002). The majority of AEs (51.7%) were mild; 11.4% of AEs were of severe intensity in either treatment group. In both treatment groups, most AEs were considered unrelated to the intake of study medication (NAMR: 68.3% versus placebo: 77.7%). However, more AEs deemed at least possibly related to the intake of study medication occurred in the NAMR group compared with the placebo group (20.0% versus 10.5%).
Serious and other significant AEs Serious AEs (SAEs) occurred in 274 (50.7%) patients in the NAMR group and 93 (50.8%) patients in the placebo group. An overview of SAEs occurring in ≥1% of patients in either treatment group is given in Supplementary data, Table S5. Events of myocardial infarction, stroke, death or any SAE of the system organ class cardiac disorders were reported in 72 (13.3%) patients in the NAMR group and 19 (10.4%) patients in the placebo group (P = .31). All-cause mortality was comparable between the treatment groups [NAMR: 5.9% (n = 32) versus placebo: 6.0% (n = 11), P = 1.00]. All deaths were judged unlikely or not related to the intake of study medication.
The percentage of patients who permanently discontinued the intake of study medication due to AEs was significantly higher in the NAMR group compared with the placebo group [NAMR: 21.5% (n = 116) versus placebo: 11.5% (n = 21), P = .003]. The most common AEs leading to permanent discontinuation of study medication—apart from renal transplant—included diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting, thrombocytopenia and pruritus (Supplementary data, Table S6).

Common AEs Supplementary data, Table S7 shows the incidence of AEs occurring in ≥2% of patients in either treatment group. Twenty-three AEs that were reported for ≥5% of patients in either treatment group were analysed in more detail using the Andersen–Gill model. These analyses showed a significantly increased risk of diarrhoea, pruritus, thrombocytopenia and anaemia in the NAMR group compared with the placebo group. A significantly lower risk compared with placebo was observed for muscle spasms. The HR could not be calculated for herpes zoster, as all reported cases occurred in the NAMR group (Table 2).
In addition, as NA was associated with increases in blood glucose in previous studies, AEs relating to increasing blood glucose concentrations were analysed in more detail. Overall, nine events of increased blood glucose concentrations were reported in the NAMR group.

More detailed analyses of the above-mentioned AEs are provided in the Supplementary material.

Laboratory values Results for safety laboratory parameters are shown in Supplementary data, Table S2. Of note, NAMR was associated with a subtle reduction in the mean erythrocyte number and haemoglobin concentration as well as a small increase in mean serum bilirubin concentrations. Furthermore, NAMR treatment resulted in a transient increase in the mean serum glucose and haemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) concentration.

DISCUSSION
This is the first randomized controlled trial that investigated the long-term efficacy and safety of NAMR as an add-on therapy to PBs in a large cohort of HD patients with hyperphosphataemia. NAMR significantly reduced serum phosphate compared with placebo over the first 24 weeks of treatment, although the treatment effect was not maintained up to week 52 in the ITT population. The reported AEs were generally consistent with the known safety profile of NA; however, several new safety signals were identified.

Our results regarding the phosphate-lowering efficacy of NAMR over 24 weeks of treatment are in line with results from previous short-term studies of NA in dialysis patients [17–19, 22]. In a recent randomized controlled trial, Liu et al. [23] treated 98 HD patients with NA or placebo in addition to calcium-based PBs for 52 weeks. Data for the ITT population were imputed using a last observation carried forward approach. The serum phosphate concentration was significantly lower in the NA group compared with the placebo group at weeks 8, 12, 20, 44 and 52. However, the small sample size of this study limits the interpretation of these findings.

It is possible that a sustained treatment effect up to week 52 in the present study was not achieved in the ITT population because patients were asked to remain in the study in case of premature discontinuation of study medication. In a placebo-controlled study that enrols patients with a therapy-refractory condition, permanent discontinuation of the study medication necessarily favours the placebo group when patients remain in the study for further follow-up.

We analysed various factors that may have negatively affected the long-term efficacy of NAMR. The metabolite-based analysis of compliance showed that ∼30% of patients receiving NAMR in the completer population were non-compliant at week 52. Poor compliance with pharmacological treatment is a well-documented issue in ESRD patients [27], with reported rates of non-adherence to PB medication ranging from 22 to 74% [28]. Non-adherence to PBs is associated with significantly higher serum phosphate concentrations in HD patients [29, 30]. Thus the high non-compliance rate in our study likely contributed to the lack of long-term efficacy of NAMR.

High baseline serum iPTH concentrations appear to limit the long-term efficacy of NAMR in our study. Excess phosphate release from bone resulting from increased iPTH concentrations contributes to elevated serum phosphate concentrations in ESRD patients [31]. We did not exclude patients with severe secondary hyperparathyroidism, which may have contributed to the limited long-term efficacy of NAMR.

Furthermore, the study design permitted adjustments of relevant co-medications after week 12. The observed differences in the use of rescue therapy between the treatment groups may have resulted in an underestimation of the treatment effect. However, the treatment conditions in the second phase of the study more closely resemble actual clinical practice, increasing the external validity of the study.

AEs occurred significantly more often in patients randomized to NAMR compared with patients randomized to placebo. However, the frequency of SAEs and all-cause mortality was comparable between the treatment groups. The reported AEs were generally in line with the known safety profile of NA, although several new safety signals were identified.

In line with reports from previous studies, NAMR treatment was associated with gastrointestinal disturbances (diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting) and thrombocytopenia [16–20, 22, 32, 33]. A higher risk of pruritus was also observed, which has been previously reported for niacin [34].

NAMR was associated with a subtle reduction in the mean erythrocyte number and haemoglobin concentration as well as a small increase in mean serum bilirubin concentrations. These observations are in line with a hyperbilirubinaemic effect described for niacin. This effect has been linked to increased haeme oxygenase-1 activity that may result in enhanced erythrocyte turnover [35–37]. The observed changes in the laboratory parameters translated into a significantly higher risk of anaemia, which has not been reported in previous studies of NA in dialysis patients [16–23]. However, a trend for an increased incidence of anaemia was observed in patients on statin therapy treated with niacin [34].

Herpes zoster occurred exclusively in the NAMR group. No herpes zoster cases were reported in previous studies of NA in dialysis patients [16–23]. ESRD patients are at an increased risk of herpes zoster compared with the general population, with reported incidence rates ranging from 2.23 to 8.48 per 100 patient years [38–40]. A comparable incidence rate of 6.38/100 patient years was observed in the NAMR group of the present study. A high proportion of patients in the study had concomitant diseases that have been linked to an increased incidence of herpes zoster, including cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and immunosuppressive conditions [41–43]. Subtle baseline imbalances for relevant risk factors may have contributed to the observed difference in the herpes zoster incidences between the treatment groups. Yet, our results are in line with safety data reported for niacin and niacin/laropiprant. The AIM-HIGH trial found an increased incidence of herpes zoster in patients on statin therapy treated with niacin [34]. In the HPS2-THRIVE trial, niacin/laropiprant was associated with a significantly increased incidence of serious infections in patients with vascular disease [44].

NAMR treatment resulted in a transient increase in the mean serum glucose and HbA1c concentration. Previous small studies reported inconclusive findings regarding the effects of NA on serum glucose in dialysis patients [19, 22, 45]. However, niacin is known to be associated with increases in blood glucose [46–48] and a higher risk of new-onset diabetes [49].

This study has several noteworthy strengths and limitations. The main strengths of this study include the large patient population and long-term drug administration period. Measurement of NA metabolites provided a more realistic compliance estimate compared with standard pill counting and enabled a more comprehensive appraisal, particularly of the safety data. A limitation of this study is that up-titration of the dose due to a lack of efficacy resulted in higher doses in the placebo group, which may have promoted partial unblinding. The rate of treatment discontinuation during follow-up was high, which may have introduced bias due to incomplete data. We did not assess dietary protein intake throughout the study, which may have hampered the interpretation of the study results. Compliance to PBs was also not assessed. However, due to the placebo-controlled design of the study, differences in overall compliance or compliance to PBs between the treatment groups are unlikely.

In conclusion, NAMR combined with PBs significantly reduced serum phosphate over the first 24 weeks of treatment, but the statistical estimation of the treatment effect was doubtful after week 40 due to the large number of patients who discontinued the intake of study medication. The reported AEs were generally consistent with the known safety profile of NA. However, several newly identified safety signals warrant further evaluation to confirm a causative association with NAMR exposure. Overall, the results of this study point towards an unfavourable benefit:risk ratio of NAMR and thus do not support the wide use of this compound for the treatment of HD patients with hyperphosphataemia in clinical practice.