Introduction
Suspicion of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) is a common reason for acute admission, contributing significantly to the crowding of emergency departments (EDs) and cardiac departments worldwide.1–3 Rapid rule-out of AMI is needed to reduce this burden on the health care systems. The present AMI rule-out strategies are challenged by the late release of cardiac troponin (cTn) and the consequent need for serial measurements of cTn.4

A dual-(bio)marker rule-out strategy (DMS) combining copeptin and troponin has previously shown an advantage in achieving earlier and safe rule-out of AMI.5–8 Copeptin, the plasma-stable C-terminal part of the arginine vasopressin (AVP) prohormone, is released in equimolar quantities with AVP as part of the humoral stress response in cases of endogenous and/or haemodynamic stress.9 Copeptin concentrations rise early in case of an AMI. This early release of copeptin in AMI covers the initial period where troponin is still in normal levels, as seen in AMI patients presenting early after onset of symptoms.10–17 Appreciating the early release of copeptin and the relatively later release of troponin, the optimal sampling time for copeptin is as close to onset of symptoms as possible, and for troponin, the optimal sampling time is later to allow for troponin levels to rise to detectable levels.11,18 Consequently, a timely optimized DMS algorithm, where copeptin is measured in a prehospital acquired blood sample and high-sensitivity cTn (hs-cTn) in a blood sample acquired at arrival to hospital, could potentially provide safe rule-out of AMI early after arrival to hospital.

This led to the Accelerated Rule-Out of AMI using copeptin and high-sensitivity troponin (AROMI) trial, a randomized controlled trial (RCT) in patients with suspected AMI, in which we aimed to evaluate if an accelerated DMS combining prehospital copeptin and in-hospital high-sensitivity cTn T (hs-cTnT) can safely reduce hospital length of stay (LOS) compared to the 0 h/3 h algorithm.19


Methods
Trial design and oversight
The AROMI study is an investigator-initiated, randomized, controlled, open-label, multicentre, all-comers trial registered in ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT02666326). Full trial protocol has been published previously.19

The trial was designed, planned, and conducted by the trial steering committee, consisting of the manuscript authors and in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and the International Council for Harmonization Good Clinical Practice Guidelines. The protocol was approved by the Central Denmark Region Committees on Health Research Ethics (approval number 1-10-72-150-15). Written informed consent was obtained from all participants.

An independent data and safety monitoring board (DSMB) monitored and guided the trial. The DSMB evaluated safety measures and primary endpoints after inclusion of 500, 1000, and 3000 patients (see trial protocol).19

The Biostatistical Advisory Service—BIAS, Aarhus University, provided statistical support. The funders of the trial did not influence the trial design, data collection, analysis, or the decision to publish. The first author wrote the first draft of the manuscript. All authors vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data and for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol.

Setting
The study was conducted in the Central Denmark Region. Here, the majority of patients with suspected AMI are transported to hospital by emergency medical services (EMS).20,21 As a standard procedure, all patients have an electrocardiogram (ECG) acquired and a point-of-care (POC) cTnT measured in the ambulance. These are used for prehospital telemedical triage of high-risk patients.22–24 Blood samples for POC analysis are drawn by the paramedic as a standard, non–study-related procedure.25,26 The blood draw procedure does not influence time to arrival at hospital, since it is performed en route to hospital in the moving ambulance. The sample is drawn via a standard intravenous cannula, inserted prehospitally (also a standard procedure in all patients with suspected AMI). The prehospital blood draw procedure is validated and has been a standard procedure for more than 10 years in the Central Denmark Region.25,26

During the AROMI study, this blood sample was brought to hospital for further analysis, including copeptin analysis (see below).

In the three recruiting sites, patients with suspected AMI are in general admitted directly to a cardiac department for diagnostic workup and thus bypass the ED. However, patients with very low risk (very low-risk profile or low suspicion according to symptoms) may, after prehospital telemedical triage, be admitted to ED for evaluation.

At the time of this study, the standard diagnostic algorithm for rule-out of AMI in Denmark was the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) 0 h/3 h algorithm. Thus, the vast majority of patients have at least two hs-cTn measurements performed: at arrival to hospital (0 h) and 3 h later.

Trial population
We enroled patients fulfiling the following inclusion and exclusion criteria:

Inclusion criteria

Patients admitted by ambulance to one of three cardiac departments with suspicion of AMI after having ECG diagnostics performed via telemedicine.
A successful prehospital blood sampling is required for inclusion. Result of prehospital POC-TnT did not influence inclusion, in order to secure external validity.
Exclusion criteria

Aged younger than 18 years.
Patients in whom a firm and valid informed consent is unattainable.
Patients triaged directly to the tertiary centre with suspected ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) or for cardiac reasons other than suspected AMI.
Patients who, at the time of admission, are known to have central diabetes insipidus.
Patients in whom an obvious alternative diagnosis is suspected at the time of arrival to hospital and without suspicion of AMI. For complete inclusion, exclusion, and allocation procedures, see trial protocol.19
Trial intervention
Participants were randomized 1:1 to either

‘Standard diagnostic protocol’: rule out of AMI using a 0 h/3 h algorithm [hs-cTnT measured at arrival to hospital (0 h) and 3 h later]4
or to

‘Accelerated diagnostic protocol’: rule out of AMI using a dual-marker strategy combining copeptin measured in the prehospitally acquired blood sample and the first in-hospital hs-cTnT (0 h).
In the standard diagnostic group, AMI was ruled out if the patient had at least two consecutive measurements of hs-cTnT <99th centile (14 ng/L) and/or no significant dynamic change between the two hs-cTnT measurements, according to the third/fourth universal definition of AMI.4,27,28

In the accelerated diagnostic group, AMI was ruled out if copeptin in the prehospital blood sample was <95th centile (9.8 pmol/L) and hs-cTnT in the 0 h blood sample was <99th centile (14 ng/L). Regardless of biomarker results, the decision to discharge or do further diagnostic workup, including repeating hs-cTnT measurement, was at the discretion of the attending physician.

Biomarker analysis
All biomarker analyses (hs-cTnT and copeptin) were performed at the central hospital laboratories at the three recruiting sites.

Copeptin measurement was performed using the Thermo Fischer Scientific BRAHMS Copeptin pro AVP KRYPTOR assay (BRAHMS GmbH, Hennigsdorf/Berlin, Germany). The assay has a lower detection limit of 0.7 pmol/L. In a normal reference population, the 95th percentile upper reference limit (URL) is 9.8 pmol/L.29

For hs-cTnT measurement, the Troponin T hs assay (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim, Germany) was used. The assay has a lower detection limit of 5 ng/L, a lowest concentration with a coefficient of variation below 10% of 13 ng/L, and a 99th percentile URL of 14 ng/L.30

Additional biomarker measurement
Besides the described biomarker measurement, we aimed to measure hs-cTnT and copeptin in all prehospital and 0-h samples (from both the accelerated and the standard diagnostic arms) and we aimed to perform an additional blood draw after 1 h in the standard arm (in as many patients as feasible in clinical practice). Only hs-cTnT was analysed in this 1-h sample. None of these additional biomarker results were available to the clinical personnel.

Outcomes including major adverse cardiac events
Primary outcomes The AROMI study had two primary outcomes: (i) an efficacy endpoint and (ii) a safety endpoint. The primary efficacy outcome was LOS in patients discharged after ‘early rule-out’ (considered equivalent to discharge from ED in a non-Danish clinical setup). Length of stay was defined as time from admission to time of discharge and based on real-time electronic registrations in hospital logistic systems, supplemented with manual registrations and time of electronic patient consent. ‘Early rule-out’ was defined as discharge within 12 h of admission. The primary safety endpoint was a combined endpoint of major adverse cardiac events (MACE) consisting of ‘all-cause mortality’, ‘survived cardiac arrest’, ‘confirmed acute coronary syndrome (ACS) or readmission with ACS’, ‘non-scheduled coronary intervention’, and ‘life-threatening arrhythmias’, occurring within the time from randomization to 30 days after randomization.
Secondary outcomes Secondary outcomes included LOS in all included patients; combined MACE rate (i) during index admission and (ii) between discharge and 30 days from randomization; and the individual rates of each component of the primary safety (MACE) outcome occurring within 30 days of randomization; during index admission; and between discharge and 30 days from randomization.
Diagnostic rule-out properties [sensitivity, specificity, and negative predictive value (NPV)] regarding AMI for the accelerated DMS and the standard 0 h/3 h algorithm were calculated using data from the entire cohort. For the sub-group of patients with complete data on prehospital copeptin, 0 h hs-cTnT, 1 h hs-cTnT, and 3 h hs-cTnT, we calculated and compared diagnostic properties regarding AMI for the accelerated DMS, the standard 0 h/3 h algorithm, a 0 h algorithm (single-sample rule-out), and the ESC 0 h/1 h algorithm.

Data collection
Data on primary admission and follow-up were collected from prehospital logistic databases, prehospital patient files, in-hospital electronic patient files, hospital logistic systems, the Danish National Registry of Patients, the clinical laboratory information system, the civil registration system, the DANARREST database (registration of all in-hospital cardiac arrests), the Western Denmark Heart registry (data on all coronary angiographies, percutaneous coronary interventions, and coronary artery bypass graft surgeries in Western Denmark), and from manual registrations.

Length of stay was based on real-time electronic registrations in hospital logistic systems, supplemented with manual registrations and time of electronic patient consent.

All possible MACE were identified from the above sources and subsequently manually adjudicated by an endpoint review committee (EPC), blinded to treatment–group assignments and using all available clinical information. Before completion of follow-up, the EPC only included independent members. After completion of follow-up, four members of the trial steering committee contributed to the adjudication process. All events were adjudicated by EPC members, of whom at least one was an independent member. If the two EPC members did not agree, a third adjudicator was involved and a majority vote accepted.

Statistical analysis
The AROMI study was designed to show superiority regarding the primary efficacy endpoint (LOS) and non-inferiority in the primary safety endpoint (MACE). Primary endpoints were hierarchically tested, with LOS before MACE. In the non-inferiority evaluation of MACE, a non-inferiority limit of 2% (absolute) was considered as clinical relevant and feasible.

Expecting a 30-day MACE rate of 6.5%, using a non-inferiority limit of 2%, and with a one-sided alpha of 2.5% and a power of 80%, we calculated a need for enrolment of 4772 patients. For further information in sample size calculation, see trial protocol.19

All analyses were performed as both intention-to-treat (ITT) and per-protocol (PP) analyses. Intention-to-treat results are presented below and PP results are presented as secondary analyses in the supplementary data.

Categorical data are presented as numbers and proportions. Continuous data are presented as means and 95% confidence interval (CI) or medians and interquartile ranges (IQR). For comparison between groups, Fisher’s exact test and Pearson’s ?2 test were used for categorical data, and unpaired samples t-test and Wilcoxon rank sum for continuous data as appropriate. Non-inferiority evaluation of MACE was evaluated as one-sided, and all other calculations were two-sided. Analyses were performed using STATA IC software, versions 15.1 and 16.1.


Results
The first patient was included on 25 January 2016 and the last patient was included on 3 September 2019. The study was prematurely terminated after recommendation from the study DSMB, due to a change in the availability of hs-cTnT (change in laboratory assay from troponin T to troponin I at the in-hospital laboratories) at two of three recruiting hospitals.

Trial participants
At the time of termination, 4516 of the planned 4772 patients had been included. A total of 165 patients were excluded after inclusion, primarily due to ‘no’ or ‘insufficient’ prehospital blood sampling or incomplete labelling of the prehospital blood sample (Figure 1). The final trial cohort included 4351 patients.
Baseline characteristics are summarized in Table 1 and clinical presentation in Table 2. No differences in demographics, risk factors for myocardial infarction, comorbidity, or clinical presentation were seen between the two groups. Median age was 63.5 years, 57% were male, and 39% had a history of ischaemic heart disease. The predominant presenting symptom was chest pain (92%). One-third presented with dyspnoea (as main or accompanying symptom).
Intervention
Primary outcomes
Length of hospital stay in patients discharged after early rule-out of acute myocardial infarction (discharge <12 h) The proportion of patients discharged within 12 h of admission were similar in the two arms [accelerated group 1029/2179 (47.2%) vs. standard group 1028/2172 (47.3%); P = .94]. Mean LOS in patients discharged after early rule-out was significantly shorter in the accelerated group (6.9 h) as compared with the standard group (7.8 h) with a reduction of nearly 1 h [0.9 h (95% CI 0.7–1.1 h)]. Table 3 summarizes the overall LOS and LOS by recruiting sites. Figure 2A shows proportion of early rule-out patients discharged over time.
Major adverse cardiac events During the 30-day follow-up period, 625 patients (14.4%) experienced a MACE event. Thirty-day MACE rate was 14.2% in the accelerated group and 14.5% in the standard group (see Table 4). Using the prespecified 2% absolute non-inferiority margin, the MACE rate in accelerated rule out was non-inferior to standard protocol [absolute risk difference -0.4% (95% CI -2.5 to 1.7); P-value for non-inferiority = .013] (Figure 3).
Only small differences were seen between ITT and PP analyses for either of the primary endpoints. In summary, the average LOS reduction in PP analysis was 1.0 h (95% CI 0.8–1.2 h) and absolute 30-day MACE risk difference was -0.5% (95% CI -2.6 to 1.6) (P-value for non-inferiority = .009) (see supplementary data).

Secondary endpoints
Major adverse cardiac events Rates of the individual 30-day MACE components were similar in the two study arms. Acute coronary syndrome was the main MACE component contributing with 576 of 625 events. Table 4 summarizes rates of individual and combined MACE components during index admission and from discharge to 30 days and in total within 30 days of admission/randomization.
In the sub-group of patients discharged after early rule-out (<12 h), six patients in each study arm experienced a MACE event between discharge and 30 days post-randomization [0.6% (95% CI 0.2–1.3) vs. 0.6% (95% CI 0.2–1.3)]. Of these patients, no patients in the accelerated arm and two patients in the standard arm experienced an AMI in this period (Table 4).

Length of stay Median LOS in all included patients was similar in the two study arms: standard arm 12.6 h (IQR 7.6–29.5 h; range 1.5–3266.0 h) and accelerated arm 12.7 h (IQR 7.0–32.9 h; range 0.8–1244.7 h). The distribution of LOS is presented in Figure 2B.
Other results
Acute coronary syndrome rates during index admission and adherence to study protocol During index admission, 564 (13.0%) of all patients were diagnosed with ACS [STEMI 21 (0.5%); non–ST-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) 379 (8.7%); unstable angina pectoris (UAP) 165(3.8%)] with similar rates in the two study arms (Table 4).
In the accelerated diagnostic group, 1016 patients (47%) had both the prehospital copeptin and first in-hospital troponin below the prespecified cut-point concentrations, potentially allowing for AMI rule-out at time of admission. Of these potential rule-out patients, 805 (79%) were discharged without further biomarker measurement (=adherence to study protocol), while 211 patients (21%) had a second or more hs-cTnT measured before discharge. During index admission, AMI was diagnosed in 3 of these 1016 potential rule-out patients (0.3%). None of these three patients were however considered for early discharge in the clinical setting (see supplementary data for further description).

In the standard diagnostic group, 1812 (83%) patients classified as AMI rule-out (both hs-cTnT < 99th percentile URL and no significant rise or fall) after two hs-cTnT measurements. Of these potential rule-out patients, 120 had a third hs-cTnT measured later than 3 h. In total, 121 did not have at least two hs-cTnT measurements with 3-h interval (adherence to protocol = 89%).

Early presenters (symptoms less than 3 h) A total of 1185 patients (28%) were early presenters. Major adverse cardiac event rates in early presenters are listed in Supplementary data online, Table S1. No major differences were seen between the two randomization arms, and no early presenters experienced an AMI between discharge and 30 days after randomization.
Diagnostic properties regarding acute myocardial infarction and timing of biomarker results In a post hoc analysis focusing on AMI as outcome, we assessed the diagnostic properties of the accelerated DMS and the 0 h/3 h algorithm. In the overall cohort, the accelerated DMS performed with a sensitivity of 98.8% (95% CI 94.2–99.4), a specificity of 52.8% (95% CI 50.6–55.0), and a negative predictive value of 99.6% (95% CI 99.0–99.9) for AMI diagnosis during index admission. In comparison, the 0 h/3 h algorithm had a sensitivity of 87.6% (95% CI 81.3–92.4), a specificity of 92.4% (95% CI 91.1–93.6), and a negative predictive value of 98.9% (95% CI 98.3–99.3).
Further, we assessed and compared diagnostic properties of the accelerated DMS, the 0 h/3 h algorithm, a 0 h algorithm (ruling-out AMI in a single sample at arrival to hospital if hs-cTnT < 5 ng/L), and the ESC 0 h/1 h algorithm. This comparison was only in performed in 1585 patients with a 1-h hs-cTnT available (see Supplementary data online, Tables S6–S8 for comparison of patients with and without 1-h hs-cTnT available). Diagnostic properties in this cohort are listed in Table 5. By adjusting the accelerated DMS to use same hs-cTnT cut-point value as the ESC 0 h/1 h algorithm (12 ng/L instead of 14 ng/L), the diagnostic performance of the accelerated DMS improved to excellent levels with sensitivity and NPV of 100% and specificity of 46%. From real-time laboratory timestamps, we also found that the accelerated DMS provided the needed biomarker results 70 min earlier that the ESC 0 h/1 h algorithm (Table 5). Both the accelerated DMS 0 h algorithm and the ESC 0 h/1 h performed well in early presenters (Supplementary data online, Table S2).
Discussion
Summary of main results
In this randomized, all-comers trial conducted in an everyday clinical setup, we found that an accelerated dual-marker AMI rule-out strategy combining prehospital copeptin and first in-hospital hs-cTnT can safely and significantly reduce LOS. The absolute 30-day MACE risk was non-inferior in the accelerated diagnostic group as compared to the standard diagnostic group (Structured Graphical Abstract).

The AROMI trial is to this date the largest RCT evaluating rule-out of AMI with 4351 all-comers with chest pain. The included chest pain population was comparable to other chest pain cohorts regarding baseline characteristics and outcome with an ACS rate of 12.9% and MACE rate of 15.1%.1,3

The diagnostic potential of DMS has previously been tested in several studies, showing good performances of the DMS when using contemporary cTn.5,29,31–36 A multicentre RCT showed favourable diagnostic properties and a potential of safe reduction of LOS using a DMS combining in-hospital copeptin and cTn.37 Our findings confirm and add further evidence to the efficiency and safety of the DMS seen in these previous studies. Furthermore and in line with previous studies, our results confirm that copeptin is efficient and safe in rule-out of AMI in combination with hs-cTn.38 Finally, our study addresses the value of prehospital sampling for copeptin measurement and thus a potential for future prehospital rule-out if relevant POC equipment becomes available. The utilization of the prehospital phase for diagnostic activities contains great potential for optimizing the management of chest pain patients.39–41

The absolute 0.9-h LOS reduction observed was less than expected and could be argued not to be clinical relevant. It is however fully comparable to the 1-h reduction in ED LOS found in the RAPID-TnT study, comparing the ESC 0 h/1 h algorithm to the ESC 0 h/3 h algorithm.42 Likewise, implementation of a single-sample rule-out strategy (0 h troponin < LOD or repeated hs-cTnT after 3 h) has been shown to reduce LOS with 2.4–3.3 h; however, this was in comparison with a 0 h/6–12 h strategy.43,44

In a larger context, our 0.9-h reduction is a 12% relative reduction in LOS, in almost half of the patients in one of the largest groups of patients in emergency medicine—the chest pain patients.3 The study setup required that informed consent and randomization were retrieved before first in-hospital blood sampling and may have delayed blood sampling, and thus time to final decision and discharge, however with an equal delay in both randomization arms. Site differences in LOS reduction also suggest that the LOS and the LOS reduction in rule-out patients are highly dependent of local clinical setup, including timing of sample collection, laboratory turnover time, and delay to clinical decision. In the AROMI trial, we only provided the biomarker results needed for early decision-making, and we did not interfere with the local setups.

An optimization of the diagnostic and clinical setup to comply with fast-track diagnostic strategy, e.g. with reduction of laboratory turnover time and reduction of decision delay (time from necessary test results are available to decision of the further course of the patient), would reduce the time to decision and discharge even further. Overall distribution of LOS (Figure 2B) confirms an earlier discharge for a large proportion of patients in the accelerated diagnostic group, without a prolongation of LOS for the remaining patients when compared to the standard diagnostic group.

In Denmark, the majority of chest pain patients are triaged by telemedicine while still in the ambulance and most often admitted directly to a cardiac department bypassing the local ED.21,45 Patients with very low suspicion of ACS and low a priori risk can be triaged to the ED. The AROMI trial only included patients admitted directly to a cardiac department, thus potentially excluding the lowest-risk patients and thereby reducing the early rule-out rate.3 As a result of the ED bypass of chest pain patients, we cannot evaluate the rule-out rate as the rate of discharge from ED, which has traditionally been used as an early rule-out definition in other studies. Therefore, to evaluate the effect of accelerated rule-out and for comparison with earlier rule-out studies using ED discharge as effect measure, we prespecified ‘early rule-out’ as being discharged within 12 h of admission. Length of stay in patients discharged within 12 h in the standard group of the AROMI trial was comparable to ED LOS in prior studies, and we therefore consider our ‘early rule-out patients’ (discharged within 12 h) to be equivalent to patients discharged from ED in other clinical setups.42,44

The overall MACE rate was considerably higher than expected. While a higher event rate would normally increase study power, this is different in non-inferior trials; a 2% difference in event rates around 6.5% equals a 30% relative difference, whereas a 2% absolute difference in event rates around 15% only equals a 13% relative difference. Despite this, we were still able to confirm non-inferiority.

Prehospital blood sampling is highly feasible and has been standard procedure in chest pain patients in the Central Denmark Region for more than a decade. Until recently, only contemporary troponin T analysis has been available for analysis in POC equipment eligible for use in ambulances. While several hs-cTn POC devices eligible for ambulance use are now entering the market, no POC assays for copeptin are available yet. Point-of-care equipment for both hs-cTn and copeptin measurements could however reduce both the in-hospital delay and LOS in rule-out patients. Also, this could be the first step towards prehospital rule-out of AMI. A recent Australian cost evaluation found that implementation of risk stratification based on prehospital POC troponin and paramedic evaluation could reduce cost substantially in chest pain patients.40

The interpretation of our results is challenged by the fact that the principles of AMI diagnostics are a rapidly evolving area. At the time of study design, study initiation, and recruitment, the 0 h/3 h algorithm was recommended for rule-out of AMI by international guidelines.4 However, between completion of study recruitment and now, the ESC has changed its guideline recommendations to now recommending the use of the ESC 0 h/1 h algorithm or the ESC 0 h/2 h algorithm. This highly affects the interpretation of our results. However, the study was designed with a secondary objective to compare diagnostic properties of different rule-out algorithms including the now-recommended ESC 0 h/1 h algorithm. This post hoc analysis shows that while the 0 h/3 h algorithm performs poorly with sensitivity <90%, as also shown in other studies, the accelerated DMS performs with a sensitivity of 98.8% and with a specificity close to 50% when diagnostic performance was evaluated in all patients.42,44,46,47 The presented diagnostic performance of the accelerated DMS was comparable to or even better than the performances of both the ESC 0 h/1 h and the ESC 0 h/2 h algorithms and slightly better than the performance of a single-sample DMS (copeptin and hs-cTn both measured at arrival to hospital) reported in four recent publications.38,48–50 In order to do a direct post hoc comparison without risk of selection bias, we compared the rule-out algorithms in a sub-cohort of 1585 patients with (i) a 1-h hs-cTnT, (ii) prehospital copeptin, and (iii) a 3-h hs-cTnT available. In this direct comparison with the ESC 0 h/1 h algorithm, the accelerated DMS performs with comparable safety and efficiency, but delivers the biomarker results needed for AMI rule-out 70 min earlier (Table 5). In addition, if adapting the accelerated DMS to use the same hs-cTnT cut-point as the ESC 0 h/1 h algorithm, the accelerated DMS outperforms the ESC 0 h/1 h algorithm. This adapted, accelerated DMS identifies 42% of chest pain patients eligible for early rule out without missing a single patient with AMI.

Study strengths and limitations
The strengths of the AROMI trial include randomized setup, high number of patients, inclusion of all comers, multicentre, and that the study was performed in a standard, everyday clinical setup.

As described above, the major limitation of the current study is the use of the 0 h/3 h algorithm as comparator. However, our results regarding reduction in LOS are comparable to the LOS reduction seen in studies comparing the ESC 0 h/1 h algorithm to the 0 h/3 h algorithm, and the diagnostic properties of the accelerated DMS are similar to those of both the ESC 0 h/1 h algorithm and a single-sample rule-out algorithm (Table 5).38,48,50 In the nature of an open-label trial, our results are prone for bias. In particular, our primary efficacy endpoint (LOS) was susceptible to influence from the clinical personnel. However, the study period lasted for more than 3 years and with three recruiting sites, a very large number of clinical personnel should have involved in this bias. Furthermore, time of arrival to hospital and time of discharge were (after manual validation) retrieved mainly from the standard electronic hospital logistic systems and only supplemented by manual registrations from the attending personnel in cases of missing data.

A potential bias in the number of adjudicated index AMIs in the accelerated diagnostic group is caused by the fact that 37% of patients in this group were discharged after only one hs-cTnT measurement, which limits the diagnosis of index AMI at adjudication. However, AMI rates were similar during index admission, after discharge (within 30 days), and in total (from randomization to day 30).

The study was limited by the interpretational challenges of a non-inferiority study. Our non-inferiority limit of 2% equals a nearly 15% potential relative risk increase. While a lower non-inferiority margin might have been more clinically relevant, we found a 2% margin to be clinically acceptable and practically feasible for an investigator-initiated and financed clinical study.

The external validity of the present study is currently limited to hospitals using hs-cTnT and not high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I. However, from a theoretical view, no differences in diagnostic performances are expected. Evaluation of resource consumption and costs will be evaluated in future publications.

Perspectives
The present diagnostic setups for AMI rule-out result in high rates of hospital bed occupation and high use of personnel resources in a low-risk patient group.3 Early rule-out of AMI provided by the accelerated DMS could allow a diagnostic setting in which low-risk patients are handled in a ‘one-touch approach’, where they are first seen by a doctor when all the measurements and biomarker results needed for rule-out are available. This instant rule-out would reduce the hospital resource spending in this patient group significantly. Furthermore, implementation of the accelerated DMS is the first step towards earlier rule-out of AMI. When high-quality POC testing (POCT) equipment for copeptin and hs-cTn becomes available, the accelerated DMS will allow for very early rule out of AMI, shortly after arrival to hospital or even in the ambulance. In combination with telemedicine, this could result in a significant reduction in the number of patients being admitted to ED and hospital with suspicion of AMI.


Conclusions
In conclusion, accelerated dual-marker rule-out of AMI, using a combination of prehospital copeptin and first in-hospital hs-cTnT, reduces LOS without increasing the rate of 30-day MACE as compared to using a 0 h/3 h rule-out strategy. The accelerated DMS and the ESC 0 h/1 h algorithm perform with similar diagnostic properties in a post hoc comparison.