Effectiveness of Yishen Tongbi decoction versus methotrexate in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis: A double-blind, randomized, controlled, non-inferiority trial
Introduction
With a prevalence of 1% worldwide and 0.42% in China, rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a prevalent and persistent inflammatory autoimmune disease; it is on the rise year by year, with the proportion of female patients being approximately three times higher than that of males (Aletaha and Smolen, 2018; Jin et al., 2017; Smolen et al., 2016). The primary signs and symptoms of RA are joint pain, swelling, and stiffness, which can eventually lead to irreversible joint deformity and dysfunction; these symptoms are often accompanied by metabolic disorders and heart, lung, kidney, and other multi-organ complications, which can have a serious impact on human health (Chang et al., 2021; McInnes and Schett, 2011).

Various medications are now being utilized to treat RA in clinical settings, for instance, glucocorticoids, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs), targeted biologics, and small-molecule JAK inhibitors; however, some patients still respond poorly or develop drug resistance. Hence, the hunt for new therapeutic approaches remains an important research goal for rheumatologists. In recent years, the role of herbal decoction, monomers, active ingredients, and other botanicals in the treatment of RA has attracted a lot of interest from rheumatologists both in China and other countries; their reliable anti-arthritic effects as well as safety have been verified in clinical trials or animal models (Feng et al., 2018; Jakobsson et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2020; Seca et al., 2019). The main medication for RA is MTX. A multi-center trial of MTX and Tripterygium wilfordii Hook F (TWHF) revealed that while TWHF monotherapy's clinical efficacy was comparable to that of MTX, TWHF coupled with MTX had superior efficacy to MTX alone. (Lv et al., 2015). However, these studies only demonstrated the role of herbal monomers or herbal formulations as combinations with DMARDs to treat RA, and there were no head-to-head comparative randomized controlled experiments for testing herbal compounds with MTX in terms of security and effectiveness.

Yishen Tongbi decoction (YSTB) is an herbal formula, consisting of six herbal medicines, namely Tripterygium hypoglaucum (Levl.) Hutch (Kunming Shan Hai Tang) (THH), Eucommia ulmoides Oliver (Du Zhong), Fructus Ligustri Lucidi (Nv Zhen Zi), Herba ecliptae (Han Lian Cao), Fructus lycii (Gou Qi), and Salvia miltiorrhiza Bge (Dan Shen), Patent No. ZL 2010110191532.X, which is frequently used to treat RA (Table 1). A prior clinical trial with a small sample size has demonstrated that YSTB can reduce the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and serum C-reactive protein (CRP) level of RA patients while also improving their pain and stiffness symptoms (Tan, 2010). Based on animal disease models, YSTB can relieve joint inflammation in rats with arthritis (Chen et al., 2012; Hu et al., 2021). There is the challenge of formally certifying YSTB as an evidence-based treatment, even though numerous pharmacological studies have demonstrated the promising therapeutic effect of YSTB on RA. This is because there aren't enough high-quality RCTs.
In this research, we conducted a 24-week prospective randomized double-blind trial of the effectiveness and safety between the Chinese herbal compound YSTB and MTX, to provide objective and scientific evidence-based evidence for further researchinto the use of Chinese herbal medicines for RA.

Methods
Design overview
The current trial is a 24-week, single-center, randomized controlled, double-blind study that will run from September 2019 to May 2022 at the First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine. Each participant in the study provided written informed permission, and the Institutional Ethics Committee approved the protocol (ZYYECK-2018–141). The trial was registered with the Chinese Clinical Trials Registry (ChiCTR-1900024902). The research adhered to the Tokyo Declaration and the Helsinki Declaration for humans. The Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials statement for recommendations of randomized controlled trials, including 25-item checklist, guided the drafting of the study (Schulz et al., 2010).

Setting and patients
All participants were from the outpatient and inpatient departments of the Department of Rheumatology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine.

Patients are required to fulfill each of the following requirements:
(1)
Satisfy the 2010 categorization requirements of the American College of Rheumatology (ACR)/European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology (EULAR) for RA lasting at least six weeks.

(2)
Age 18–65 years.

(3)
At least 5 tender joints (TJC) along with 3 swollen joints (SJC).

(4)
CRP >20 mg/l either ESR >28 mm/h.

(5)
Participant agreement and signing of an informed consent form.


Patients were considered for exclusion if any of the following criteria were present:
(1)
Women who are expecting or nursing.

(2)
Current or future need for childbirth.

(3)
History of chronic serious or current infection, or malignancy.

(4)
Psychiatric illnesses with a history of severe primary ailments of the heart, lungs, liver, kidney, hematological system, and other organs.

(5)
Allergy or contraindication to the test drug in the study protocol.

(6)
Patients who have used DMARDs, glucocorticoids >10 mg per day, and biologics within 3 months before enrollment.

(7)
Patients who also have other autoimmune disorders, such as systemic lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis, and dry syndrome.

(8)
Participation in other clinical research trials within 4 weeks before enrollment.

(9)
Patients who, in the investigator's judgment, shouldn't take part in this clinical trial.


Patients who met the criteria were allowed to continue using NSAIDs as well as 10 mg or less of corticosteroids each day for the duration of the study.

Randomization and interventions
According to computer software, the enrolled patients were randomly split into the MTX and YSTB groups at a ratio of 1:1. Sick patients in the Chinese medicine treatment group were administered YSTB 150 ml once daily orally after meals, MTX placebo 7.5 mg once weekly orally after meals, folic acid tablets placebo 10 mg orally the next day, and MTX placebo increased from 7.5 mg to 2.5 mg weekly until 15 mg unchanged. In the Western medicine treatment group, MTX 7.5 mg was administered once a week orally after meals and 2.5 mg each week was added to 15 mg unchanged for 4 weeks 10 mg of folic acid tablets orally on the next day, and YSTB placebo 150 ml orally once a day after meals. NSAIDs (etoricoxib tablets/sodium diclofenac, three times daily, orally with meals) were to be added during treatment if the pain visual analog score was =40 mm. Table 1 displays the YSTB dosage and the placebo decocting procedure. The analysis findings of the YSTB by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) can be seen in Appendix 1. All patients' Herbal tonics are decocted by the hospital's herbal pharmacy to ensure uniformity. Patients who met the criteria were allowed to continue treatment with NSAIDs as well as small doses of corticosteroids (=10 mg/day) during the study period. Fig. 1 displays the flowchart for the study. Patients were automatically withdrawn from the study at any time point during the study.
Outcomes and measurements
Primary outcome
The investigators assessed clinical information and data of the enrolled patients at baseline, week 4, week 12, and week 24 (the "baseline" is the "0" moment before the intervention of the test or control group. "week 4"," week 12" and "week 24" are the points at which the study object should return to the hospital after receiving treatment, that is, the 4th, 12th, and 24th weeks after the first day of treatment). The primary outcome at week 24 was a 50% improvement in the patient's clinical disease activity index (CDAI), or a CDAI score of 2.8.

Secondary outcomes
The patient's achievement of an ACR 20/50/70 response at week 24 was the secondary endpoint, as determined by a 20%/50%/70% reduction in the quantity of painful and swollen joints (a total of 28 joints), as well as at least three of the five outcomes listed below: the patient's VAS score for pain, the patient's overall assessment of the disease, the physician's overall assessment of the patient, the patient's evaluation of disability, and acute phase reactants. EULAR's good or moderate response was based on the difference in DAS28 and the DAS28 outcome value: a good response is a DAS28 = 3.2 and DAS28 (improvement) value decreased from baseline to > 1.2. DAS28 = 5.1 at assessment and a decline > 0.6 units from baseline, or a DAS28 > 5.1 at assessment and a decline > 1.2 units from baseline, is considered a EULAR good or moderate response (Yuan et al., 2020). Clinical remission is indicated by DAS28-ESR < 2.6, low disease activity (LDA) by DAS28-ESA < 3.2, Improvement in the simplified disease activity index (SDAI) is indicated by a value of = 3.3, or an SDAI improvement of 50%. radiological two-handed X-ray van der Heijde modified total sharp score (mTSS) assessment at baseline and week 24; all X-rays were scored blinded by a specialist imaging physician.

Safety outcomes
Safety was assessed based on the patient's physical examination, self-reported discomfort, and laboratory indicators, including routine blood and liver and kidney function test results from baseline to study completion.

Statistical analysis
The data were analyzed by two independent statisticians who were blinded to the group assignment using SPSS 24.0, SAS 9.4, and GraphPad Prism 8. Baseline data were analyzed by a full analysis set. The primary and secondary efficacy outcomes were assessed using ITT and PP (intent-to-treat) analyses. In contrast to the PP analysis, which only included patients who completed the 24-week study, the ITT analysis included patients who had only received a single therapy. Patients' data from the experiment who departed early were considered to be lost. The last observation carried forward approach was used to impute the missing data in the ITT analysis. All of the patients who had received at least one dosage of the prescribed therapy drug were evaluated for treatment safety using the safety set analysis.

All continuous data were reported as mean (SD) or median (25th quartiles, 75th quartiles). Categorical variables were displayed as numbers (n) either percentage (%). For the primary outcomes, the therapeutic efficacy of YSTB and MTX was compared by non-inferiority test. It was estimated that a sample size of 98 participants (49 patients per group) would have at the fewest 80% power to detect a non-inferiority margin of -10%. If the result was found to be consistent with a non-inferiority outcome, the difference test (Chi-square test) would continue to be used to assess whether the treatment group was passed beyond the control group. The Chi-square test or Fisher's exact test was used to analyze secondary outcomes and drug safety. p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant for all two-sided statistical tests. The paired sample t-test and independent t-test were employed to assess any changes in mTSS involving the two groups for normally distributed variables. Two independent samples of the Mann-Whitney U test and two paired samples of the Wilcoxon signed rank sum test was employed for variables that weren't normally distributed.

Results
Patient characteristics
First of all, 118 people in all received a RA diagnosis, 11 patients of whom have not met the scope of RA activity, 7 patients declined participation. Therefore, 100 patients were included and divided into each of the YSTB and MTX groups in a 1:1 ratio, with one patient in each group ending the study without receiving treatment; As a result, 49 patients in each group received treatment. Fig. 1 illustrates that in the YSTB and MTX groups, respectively, 82% (40/49) and 86% (42/49) of patients finished the 24-week trial.

According to Table 2, the baseline values for the two groups did not significantly differ, with less than 10 mg/day of oral glucocorticoids being taken by 12.2% (6/49) of the YSTB group patients and 16.3% (8/49) of the MTX group patients, respectively (p > 0.05). Moreover, the difference in adverse prognostic factors between the two groups was roughly the same (meeting one of the following indicators: moderate to high disease activity with a DAS28 value of >3.2 despite treatment with conventional DMARDs; elevated acute phase reactant levels with a serum CRP level of >0.6 mg/dl or ESR > 28 mm/h; the quantity of swollen and painful joints = 4; high anti-citrullinated peptide antibody titers > 200 U/ml; early onset of joint erosion; =2 conventional DMARDs are ineffective).
Clinical efficacy
The CDAI value at week 24 of the main outcome index was tested for non-inferiority (non-inferiority margin - 0.1, confidence interval 95%) in the ITT analysis, 67.4% (33/49) of patients in the YSTB group met the CDAI response criteria, compared to 57.1% (28/49) in the MTX group. The risk difference was 0.102 (95% CI -0.089 to 0.293), which demonstrated the non-inferiority of YSTB to MTX (Fig. 2). There was no statistically significant p-value in the ratio of obtaining CDAI response at week 24 between the YSTB and the MTX groups (p = 0.298) after additional testing for superiority. For ACR20/50/70, EULAR good response, EULAR good or moderate response, remission rate (DAS28 < 2.6), and LDA rate (DAS28 < 3.2), the attainment rates at week 24 for patients in the YSTB and MTX groups, respectively, were, ACR20: 77.6% (38/49) vs. 73.5% (36/49), p = 0.639; ACR50: 57.1% (28/49) vs. 46.9% (23/49), p = 0.312; ACR70: 24.5% (12/49) vs. 28.6% (14/49), p = 0.647; EULAR good response: 24.5% (12/49) vs. 22.5% (11/49), p = 0.812; EULAR good or moderate response: 79.6% (39/49) vs. 77.6% (38/49), p = 0.806; Remission rate: 24.5% (12/49) vs. 14.3% (7/49), p = 0.201; LDA rate: 24.5% (12/49) vs. 22.5% (11/49), p = 0.812. It was noteworthy that at week 4, there was statistically significant attainment of ACR20 and EULAR good or moderate response in the YSTB and MTX groups, specifically ACR20: 57.1% (28/49) vs. 30.6% (15/49), p = 0.008; EULAR good or moderate response: 61.2% (30/49) vs. 34.7% (17/49), p = 0.009 (Fig. 3). From the baseline through the 24th week, Table 3 lists all clinical symptoms and laboratory results for the YSTB and MTX groups. Compared with the baseline information, the YSTB and MTX groups each showed significant improvements in the clinical symptoms, laboratory indices, DAS28, Health Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ) Disability Index, CDAI, and SDAI before and after treatment (p < 0.05). ?DAS28-ESR from baseline to week 24 in the YSTB group (mean improvement: 2.1) was not significantly different compared with that in the MTX group (mean improvement: 2.0), p = 0.929. Between baseline and week 24, neither group's HAQ Disability Index significantly improved (median improvement: 0.8 and 0.7, respectively; p = 0.169), and not much has changed was found in the CDAI (median improvement: 20.0 and 16.0, respectively; p = 0.647) or SDAI (21.9 and 18.7, respectively; p = 0.856). Notably, in terms of inflammatory indicators, the YSTB group's serum CRP level considerably dropped at week 4 (p < 0.001), whereas the MTX group's level dropped at week 12 (p < 0.001), and the serum CRP level decreased faster in the YSTB group than in the MTX group.
Fig. 2. ITT and PP analysis over different time points. For the primary endpoint, CDAI are risk differences (dots) with a 95%CI (line) Non-inferiority of tailoring based on CDAI would be shown if the lower limit of the 95%CI of the risk difference was higher than the -10% non-inferiority margin (dotted line). CI, Confidence interval; CDAI, Clinical Disease Activity Index; SDAI, simplified disease activity index.
Fig. 3. Intentional therapy (ITT) analysis of primary and secondary resolution indicators over time points. The number within each bar represents the number of patients who met the index improvement criteria for each group, and the denominator of the total number of patients enrolled (49 patients per group) was used to calculate the response criteria rate. Missing data for patients who withdrew early were calculated using carryover interpolation. ACR, American College of Rheumatology; CDAI, Clinical Disease Activity Index; SDAI, simplified disease activity index; EULAR, European League Against Rheumatism; YSTB, Yishen Tongbi decoction; MTX, methotrexate.
In the PP analysis, 77.5% (31/40) and 66.7% (28/42) of the YSTB and MTX groups, respectively, achieved CDAI response attainment at week 24. Non-inferiority was demonstrated for YSTB versus MTX (risk difference 0.108, 95% CI -0.084 to 0.301), and no statistically pronounced difference was found after the test of superiority (p = 0.275). Notably, the results of the PP analysis were consistent with those of the ITT analysis. Similar statistical results to those of the ITT analysis were seen for the YSTB and MTX groups at week 24 for ACR20/50/70, EULAR good response, EULAR good or moderate response, remission rate, and LDA rate attainment rates (Fig. 4).
Fig. 4. Compliance with the primary and secondary resolution indicators of the protocol analysis (PP) over time points. The number within each bar represents the number of patients who met the index improvement criteria for each group, and the denominator of the number of patients who completed the full 24-week study (40 in the YSTB group and 42 in the MTX group) was used to calculate the response criteria rate. ACR, American College of Rheumatology; CDAI, Clinical Disease Activity Index; SDAI, simplified disease activity index; EULAR, European League Against Rheumatism; YSTB, Yishen Tongbi decoction; MTX, methotrexate.

Nine patients (18.4%) in the YSTB group did not complete the 24-week trial; four patients (8.2%) had adverse events; one patient (2.0%) had no efficacy; two patients (4.1%) were lost to follow-up; and two patients (4.1%) were no longer willing to participate, whereas a total of seven patients (14.3%) in the MTX group did not complete the 24-week trial; one patient (2.0%) experienced adverse events; one patient (2.0%) had no efficacy; three patients (6.1%) were lost to follow-up; and two patients (4.1%) no longer wished to participate.

Evaluation of the radiographic joint damage
The mTSS of two-handed X-rays between the YSTB and MTX groups did not differ statistically from baseline to week 24 before and after therapy, as shown in Table 4 (p > 0.05). Additionally, at baseline and week 24, there was no statistically significant difference between the patients in the two groups in the mTSS of two-handed X-rays (p > 0.05).
Safety and tolerability
Table 5 contains a list of all the adverse events, serious adverse events, and drug-related adverse events from the pilot research, along with information on how these occurrences were reported. In contrast to the incidence of drug-related adverse events, which was 28.6% (14/49) and 22.4% (11/49). (p = 0.487) The incidence of adverse events was 55.1% (27/49) and 34.7% (17/49) in the YSTB and MTX groups, respectively. Both groups' most frequent drug-related side effects were impaired liver function [upper limit of normal alanine transaminase (ALT) value of 33 U/l], with the rate of patients with abnormal liver function being 14.3% (7/49) and 12.2% (6/49) in the YSTB and MTX groups, respectively (p = 0.766). Although abnormal liver function occurred more frequently than other adverse events, 4 patients each in the YSTB group and the MTX group had slightly abnormal liver function tests, defined as one that is less than twice the upper limit of the normal value. Most were asymptomatic or had mild reactions, and the patients could continue to complete the 24-week trial without intervention. In addition, one patient in the YSTB group had a significantly increased ALT value of 123 U/l at week 12, and after outpatient treatment with liver protection and enzyme-lowering drugs, the 24-week follow-up resulted in the ALT value being within the normal range. The rate of patients with gastrointestinal reactions (diarrhea, loss of appetite, nausea, and vomiting) was 2.0% (1/49) in the YSTB and the MTX groups, respectively (p = 1.000). However, one patient in each of the YSTB group and the MTX group discontinued the study due to severe reactions of diarrhea with abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. One patient in the YSTB group discontinued the study due to paroxysmal palpitation reactions after taking the drug. The incidence of leukopenia was 2.0% (1/49) in the YSTB and the MTX groups, respectively. One patient, 2.0% (1/49) in the MTX group, appeared to be anemic. During this 24-week trial, three (3.5%) of all female patients (n = 86, of whom 43 were premenopausal) developed menstrual irregularities, two in the YSTB group and one in the MTX group, p = 0.554.
Discussion
For centuries, traditional Chinese medicine (TCM), including but not limited to herbal medicine, Chinese patent medicine, and acupuncture, has been widely used to treat various acute and chronic diseases. RA is a typical chronic disease prone to bone destruction. Ermiaosan, Wutou decoction, Xian-Fang-Huo-Ming-Yin, and other Chinese medicines can impact RA pathways, reduce cytokine levels, improve joint symptoms in rats with collagen-induced arthritis, and improve the treatment outcome and quality of life of patients, which confirms its clinical efficacy and safety (Leung et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021; Xia et al., 2020; Jakobsson Per-Johan et al., 2022). Comparing the differences between herbal compounds and the drugs recommended by guidelines for the treatment of RA is a direct and objective way to evaluate the efficacy of herbal compounds in the treatment of RA. However, only a few high-quality RCTs have compared the efficacy of conventional therapies and TCM, while most previous studies have focused on TCM as an adjunct to the treatment recommended in RA guidelines rather than a substitute. At the same time, there is no literature report on targeted head-to-head clinical studies that have been conducted with herbal compounds and the rheumatoid anchoring drug MTX (Wang et al., 2018, 2022b; Zhang et al., 2011). Surprisingly, this is the first randomized, double-blind, non-inferiority RCT trial that compares the effectiveness and safety of a Chinese herbal compound with MTX for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis that is active. Replacing the tradition of MTX with TCM is a positive exploration.

YSTB is a Chinese herbal compound that has been used in the Department of Rheumatology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou University of Traditional Chinese Medicine for more than 10 years. THH is a TCM chemical preparation that contains Triptolide, which inhibits rheumatoid fibroblast-like synovial cell migration and invasion by targeting the activation of the JNK/MAPK pathway and functions as an anti-angiogenic agent by targeting the angiogenic cascade (Kong et al., 2013; Li et al., 2014; Xi et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2016). Another herbal compound has been demonstrated to affect multiple body and cellular targets in the treatment of RA, such as the anti-inflammatory capabilities. Tanshinone IIA, one of the most important bioactive compounds in Danshen, was found to inhibit the LPS-mediated production of inflammatory cytokines and trigger apoptosis in RA fibroblast-like synoviocytes (Du et al., 2020; Tang et al., 2019). Further, Eucommia extract can improve arthritis by regulating inflammation, synovial cell proliferation, osteoclastogenesis, and bone erosion (Wang et al., 2016; Xing et al., 2020). Fructus Ligustri Lucidi can improve bone metabolism and quality in the treatment of osteoporosis (Chen et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2014). Hu et al. identified 40 chemical components in YSTB using HPLC technology, including beta, tanshinone, geniposidic acid, neochlorogenic acid, epigallocatechin, salvianolic acid, pinoresinol diglucoside, and wilfortrine. These active ingredients can improve the effect of treating RA by promoting blood circulation, anti-inflammatory, anti-osteoporosis, and-immune regulation. In addition, the ingredients of Tripterygium hypoglaucum (Levl.) Hutch in this prescription can be decocted 3.5 h in advance and then decocted together with the other five herbs, which can greatly reduce the toxicities and side effects of the ingredients of Tripterygium hypoglaucum (Levl.) Hutch. The following are the distinctions between YSTB and other Tripterygium wilfordii preparation. We believe that this is the first instance in which a strict randomized, double-blind, double-dummy clinical study has been used to assess the efficacy and safety of YSTB in the treatment of RA disorders. In this study, we performed strict quality control on YSTB herbs, which were uniformly procured from the hospital pharmacy, decocted in the decoction room, and underwent quality control analysis by liquid-phase mass spectrometry (see Supplementary Material), thus ensuring the homogeneity of efficacy (Chen et al., 2012).

In patients with active RA, this RCT examines the effectiveness and safety of YSTB and MTX. The primary outcome CDAI response at week 24 and other disease activity criteria assessments further corroborated our conclusion that YSTB was non-inferior to MTX in reducing the pain and swelling symptoms and improving the disability and quality of life of patients [secondary outcomes. ACR20/50/70, SDAI improvement, good or moderate improvement in EULAR, LDA rate, and DAS28 (remission)]. The YSTB group was able to achieve an ACR20 and EULAR good or moderate response at week 4 faster than the MTX group, which may prove the superiority of YSTB. Disability is an important aspect of RA that affects the quality of life of patients and can be semi-quantitatively assessed by mTSS for erosion and joint space narrowing (Wang et al., 2022a). According to the study's findings, there was no appreciable difference in mTSS before and after therapy between the YSTB and MTX groups. This may be because RA is a chronic disease and the resulting structural joint damage and bone loss in the hand is a chronic process; therefore, little radiological progression of structural joint damage was seen in the short term, which is similar to the results of current 6-month clinical studies (Hoff et al., 2009; Ørnbjerg, 2018; Platzer et al., 2022; van der Heijde et al., 2022; Vastesaeger et al., 2009). Furthermore, patients treated with YSTB showed a faster reduction in the serum CRP level and an earlier perception of pain relief than those treated with MTX, which is consistent with the slower reduction in inflammatory response previously reported with MTX (Zhao et al., 2022). It supported the superiority of YSTB mentioned above.

The safety of YSTB and MTX was carefully evaluated over 24 weeks and, as expected, there were fewer adverse events. The number of patients treated with YSTB showed a slightly higher ALT value during treatment than those treated with MTX; however, they were mostly mild-to-moderate adverse events with few serious ones. This phenomenon does not exclusively refer to herb-induced liver injury (Yuan et al., 2020). Patients in both the YSTB and MTX groups experienced mild leukopenia and anemia, but none of the patients had uncomfortable symptoms, and during follow-up, it was found that most of these indicators returned to the normal range at week 24. It is interesting to observe that there were more patients with menstrual abnormalities in the YSTB group than the MTX group; this may be due to the presence of Radix et Rhizoma in THH of YSTB, which is reported in the literature to have a strong effect on women's menstrual cycle, but at the same time, the study found that the effect of Radix et Rhizoma on women's menstrual cycle is reversible, which suggests that YSTB is more suitable for women without reproductive needs or postmenopausal women (Zhang et al., 2016; Bao and Dai, 2011).

The study has several strengths. The first is the study design and population. In this study, the effects of herbal compounds and MTX on the disease activity and quality of life of RA patients are being compared for the first time head-to-head, which may improve the comparability of MTX and YSTB and eliminate bias, consequently enhancing the study's reliability. Second, the study also includes individuals who withdrew from treatment for at least 3 months, which may provide sufficient evidence to assess changes in disease activity in patients with RA under these conditions. Finally, a 24-week follow-up study is also underway to further investigate the possible long-term effects of both treatments.

This study also has certain limitations. First, we conducted a randomized, double-blind clinical study at only one hospital; a larger sample size multicenter randomized controlled trial is needed to obtain more objective clinical data for validation. Second, this study was designed for an observation period of 24 weeks for radiographic progression, and we only evaluated patients’ bilateral X-rays at 6 months, which might not be enough to demonstrate the long-term protective effect of YSTB on bone destruction in RA; thus, a longer follow-up study is needed in the future to determine the bone destruction. Finally, follow-up at the end of the participation program was not mandatory, making it difficult for many patients to continue observation beyond the 6-month study period.

Conclusion
In conclusion, this randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical research provided the first proof that the herbal compound YSTB's efficacy and safety is not inferior to those of MTX and it is an effective alternative for RA treatment. YSTB had the advantage of a rapid onset of action after short-term treatment. This study provided evidence-based medicine in the treatment of RA with compound prescriptions of TCM, which would contribute to promoting phytomedicine use in RA patients.