

Improving Detection of Clinically Significant Prostate Cancer: 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging/Transrectal Ultrasound Fusion 
Guided Prostate Biopsy
SINCE the 1980s, screening methods for CaP have been static, including serum PSA 
measurement and DRE on a periodic basis. If either is abnormal or suspicious for cancer, 
TRUS guided systematic prostate biopsy is performed. Although this biopsy uses ultrasound 
guidance and selects defined zones in the prostate, there is no certainty that the actual 
tumor is being biopsied. CaP is the only solid organ tumor still diagnosed by a nontargeted 
sampling method. Using this approach for the last 30 years has yielded limited and 
varied results.1,2 The USPSTF recently categorized PSA based CaP screening as a grade 
D recommendation in a goal to prevent over diagnosis, overtreatment, and physical and 
emotional suffering.3 The USPSTF recommendation regarding PSA based screening was 
based on the inability to effectively select patients whose benefit from treatment would 
outweigh the harms associated with screening, diagnosis and treatment.

Improvements in MRI quality, technique and technology have led to increased use in 
patients with or suspected of having CaP. Although prostate MRI is limited in its ability 
to detect low grade cancer and lesions less than 5 mm, it is ideal to select patients with 
intermediate and high risk CaP with greater than 90% negative and positive predictive 
values.4,5

A new methodology of screening men for CaP was reported by NIH investigators in which 
patients with increased PSA underwent MP prostate MRI and areas suspicious for CaP were 
identified.6 In the office/outpatient setting prostate MR images of suspicious lesions/targets 
are fused with real-time TRUS biopsy techniques to guide needles to suspicious areas in the 
prostate using electromagnetic tracking. To our knowledge we report the first application of 
this newly Food and Drug Administration cleared UroNav MR/TRUS fusion guided prostate 
biopsy system (Invivo, Gainesville, Florida) outside a research hospital setting (NIH).

MATERIALS AND METHODS

We performed a phase III trial, MRI/TRUS Fusion Guided Prostate BiopsydAn Improved 
Way to Detect and Quantify Prostate Cancer, which was approved by our institutional review 
board (ClinicalTrials.gov 
NCT01566045
). Enrollment began May 2012 and the results of 
this trial have not been published previously. Subjects with increased PSA/abnormal DRE 
and MP-MRI with suspicious lesion(s) were included in study.

All study participants underwent MP prostate specific 3 Tesla MRI using a Magnetom Verio 
device. MRI was obtained with a 16-channel Sense cardiac coil (Invivo) placed on the 
anterior pelvis and a BPX-30 ERC (Medrad, Warrenton, Pennsylvania) filled with PFC-770 
(3M™). An ERC was used to detect CaP because of a reported 36% increase in sensitivity 
compared to that in patients without ERC use.7 Prostate specific pulse sequences included a 
minimum of triplanar T2-weighted, axial diffusion weighted with ADC mapping (B values 
0, 500, 1,000, 1,500 and 2,000) and dynamic contrast enhanced MRI sequences according 
to European Society of Urogenital Radiology guidelines.8 Three radiologists (ARR, EB-L 


and RV) identified and graded all lesions suspicious for cancer according to the NIH risk 
stratification systems, NIH prostate zones and nonvisual reporting (fig. 1).8,9

The NIH MP-MRI scoring system was based on the number of positive sequences. A lesion 
was considered low risk if positive on 1 or 2 of the 3 sequences. If all 3 parameters were 
positive, the lesion was considered moderate/high risk.9 At the NIH a lesion is considered 
high risk if all 4 parameters are positive, including MR spectroscopy. MR spectroscopy was 
not performed in this trial due to cost, time and little impact on overall CDR, as previously 
reported by Turkbey et al.4 All lesions locations were recorded by T2 axial slice number and 
zone number. Each axial slice of the T2 sequence of the prostate was divided into 9 zones 
(fig. 1). All lesions are described as the respective zones of involvement for each MRI slice 
(3 mm).

Subjects with a positive MP-MRI entered the phase III trial. Demographics and common 
data elements, including prior prostate biopsy history, family history of CaP, PSA and 
prior imaging, were collected before protocol prostate biopsy. All data were collected 
prospectively.

The MR/TRUS fusion guided biopsy system is based on ultrasound guided rigid registration 
with visual correction using UroNav 3.0. All images were processed on a DynaCAD 
work station (Invivo) before biopsy. According to the protocol subjects underwent 
electromagnetically tracked MR/TRUS fusion guided biopsy of MRI suspicious lesions 
before standard 12-core TRUS guided biopsy (endfire iU22 Philips ultrasound). MR/TRUS 
fusion guided biopsy was completed first due to the significant edema that develops after 12-
core biopsy, limiting fusion system performance. The principal investigator (ARR) was then 
blinded to target location by turning off the MR/TRUS fusion biopsy system. Standard 12-
core biopsy was then performed under ultrasound guidance. All specimens were placed in 
separate pathology containers for each location. Our institutional pathologist (OY) reviewed 
all pathology slides.

Descriptive statistics were used to describe patient characteristics, including age, race, PSA, 
DRE, family history and previous biopsy results. All analyses were stratified by detection 
method, biopsy outcomes, NIH prostate scoring system, modified NIH prostate zones and 
the 5-point Likert scale using the chi-square test and Student t-test.8

RESULTS

During the study period 648 patients underwent MP-MRI for suspicion of CaP and 335 
MRIs (52.4%) were positive for suspicious lesion(s). A total of 153 patients referred by 
primary urologists were consented for the study, of whom 32 were not included in analysis 
due to a prior CaP diagnosis. Also excluded were 16 men due to device failure (10), 
inclusion criteria not met (5) and inability to remain still for fusion biopsy (1). Thus, 105 
consecutive subjects were included in this external validation cohort analysis. Table 1 lists 
demographics, and clinical and biopsy characteristics. MP-MRI detected a mean of 1.9 
suspicious lesions per subject.


Did MRI Risk Stratification Score Impact CDR in Participants at Risk for CaP?

MP-MRI risk stratification systems resulted in a statistically significant difference in CDRs. 
Using the NIH scoring system the overall CDR, which included fusion biopsy and standard 
12-core biopsy, was 47.5% (19 of 40) and 72.3% of cases (47 of 65) at low and moderate/
high suspicion for cancer, respectively (p = 0.011). Overall CDRs for participants stratified 
by the 5-point Likert scale were 0%, 25.0% (2 of 8), 50.0% (23 of 46), 65.5% (19 of 29) 
and 100% (22 of 22) for grade 1 to 5 suspicious lesions, respectively (p <0.0001). The AUC 
using the 5-point Likert scale with respect to overall CDR was 0.74 (95% CI 0.66e0.83).

Did MR/TRUS Biopsy Outperform Standard Biopsy to Detect Clinically Significant CaP?

Clinically significant CaP was defined using the Epstein criteria as any Gleason pattern 4 or 
greater, or Gleason 3 + 3 disease with core length 50% or greater and/or more than 2 cores 
positive on standard 12-core TRUS guided biopy.10 Targeted core biopsy was considered 
clinically significant with any Gleason pattern 4 or greater, or MR lesion volume 0.2 cm3 
or greater.11 The chi-square test was used to compare the CDR of MR/TRUS fusion guided 
biopsy and standard 12-core biopsy stratified by no cancer, no clinically significant CaP 
and clinically significant CaP (p <0.0001, table 2). Analysis was repeated in each subgroup 
stratified by NIH risk scores (p <0.0001, table 2). Some groups proposed using cancer 
core length or index tumor longest diameter to determine the clinical significance of the 
lesion. These 2 approaches could lead to overestimation or underestimation of actual tumor 
volume if the lesion is not symmetrical. All MR lesion volumes were calculated using all 3 
dimensions by the ellipsoid formula, volume = length × width × height × 0.52, to calculate 
volume in cm3 (fig. 1). There was a 27.7% relative increase in the detection of clinically 
significant cancer using the fusion biopsy approach compared to the standard 12-core biopsy 
technique.

How Did CDR Results Stratified by Lesion and Overall CDR Compare to Initial NIH CDR?

Overall CDR and CDR per MRI suspicious lesions were comparable to those in the 
previously published cohort reported by Pinto et al (table 3).6 Coreby-core analysis resulted 
in a CDR of 37.9% (154 of 406 cases) for fusion guided biopsy and 12.5% (157 of 1,260) 
for standard 12-core biopsy (p <0.001). This was comparable to results in the NIH cohort, 
which showed an increased CDR per core by fusion with CaP revealed a statistically 
significant difference between standard 12-core and positive fusion biopsies (3.7 vs 4.6 mm, 
p = 0.01). Overall CDRs for lesions stratified by the 5-point Likert scale were 50% (1 of 
2), 23.8% (5 of 21), 31.2% (29 of 93), 63.3% (38 of 60) and 96.3% (26 of 27) for grade 1 
to 5 suspicious lesions, respectively (p <0.0001). Core length and lesion analysis using the 
5-point Likert scale were not reported in the NIH cohort.

What was Impact on CDR with MR/TRUS Biopsy Approach as Only Screening Method?

Cancer was detected in 50.5% of participants (53 of 105) when the fusion only biopsy 
approach was used (fig. 1). MR/TRUS fusion guided biopsy detected cancer in 14.3% of 
cases (15 of 105) missed by standard 12-core biopsy, including Gleason 8 in 4, Gleason 7 
in 7, high volume Gleason 6 in 2 and low volume Gleason 6 in 2. MR/TRUS fusion guided 
biopsy also upgraded 23.5% of cancers (4 of 17) deemed clinically insignificant on 12-core 


biopsy to clinically significant CaP requiring treatment. However, the MR/TRUS fusion 
guided biopsy system missed 4 cases of clinically significant CaP. A Gleason 7 cancer was 
missed due to procedural error and 3 Gleason 7 cancers were missed due to small volume 
with a core length of 0.5, 2.5 and 2.5 mm, respectively. The remaining 9 cancers missed 
by the MR/TRUS fusion guided biopsy system were low volume, clinically insignificant 
Gleason 3 + 3 cancers.

DISCUSSION

This study is an external validation of this new, potentially office based technology that 
combines the increased sensitivity and specificity associated with prostate MP-MRI with the 
ease of use of the standard TRUS guided biopsy approach that most urologists use today.

The CDR of targeted biopsy was superior to that of standard 12-core biopsy and detected 
12.4% more clinically significant cancers (13 of 105). It is possible that the performance 
of standard 12-core biopsy may have been overestimated since the same surgeon performed 
each biopsy. Although blinded, he had cognitive registration of the lesion location as well as 
the impact of MRI selection in patients undergoing biopsy.

Only 28.8% of subjects with CaP were diagnosed with low grade disease in our cohort. 
In contrast, the PLCO (Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian) and ERSPSC (European 
Randomized Screening for Prostate Cancer) screening trials had a 57.3% to 60.3% incidence 
of low grade CaP.1,12

Our CDR per patient was higher than the published results by Pinto et al (62.8% vs 
54.1% to 54.4%), although our cohort included more men with previous negative biopsy 
compared to the NIH cohort.6,13 However, multiple factors must be considered when 
comparing both MRI/TRUS fusion biopsy cohorts. MP-MRI quality is crucial when using 
these new technologies in regard to study technique and interpretation. Before the study the 
NIH molecular imaging program optimized our MR sequences for prostate imaging. Also, 
imaging conferences were held to discuss cases, review pathology findings and maintain 
quality control in regard to the interpretation and quality of prostate images. The increase in 
CDR compared to that in the NIH series could have been due to a higher threshold and/or 
selection bias for reporting a lesion as positive on MP-MRI. Of prostate MRIs interpreted 
at our institution 52% were considered positive, approximately 10% less than that reported 
in a systematic review of the literature on prostate MP-MRI.14 This is also evident in the 
difference in the mean number of lesions reported per patient in our study cohort vs the NIH 
cohort (1.9 vs 2.6). There was no randomization of subjects at either institution. Despite 
these limitations we implemented a MRI based screening program and similar results were 
achieved at these 2 centers.

Cost is a major limitation to implementing new diagnostic tests or technologies (genetic 
markers, PCA3 and/or imaging) for improved CaP risk stratification.15,16 Using 2013 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services data for processing prostate biopsy specimens 
if a fusion biopsy only approach was used, the cost saving from the decrease in the number 
of prostate biopsy specimens (which are reimbursed individually) submitted could offset 


97% of the cost of prostate MP-MRI compared to standard 12-core biopsy. MRI also 
provides information on tumor volume, Gleason grade, and local and regional stage, which 
may lead to better treatment selection for patients or possibly no treatment at all. MP-MRI 
has a reported 92% accuracy for selecting patients for treatment vs active surveillance.17,18 
Moreover, we are currently investigating prostate specific screening transabdominal MRI 
consisting of a single high resolution axial T2, a diffusion-weighted MRI with ADC maps 
and no ERC or contrast medium, which could have significantly decreased cost.

If a targeted only biopsy approach was used, 12.4% of CaP cases would have been missed 
(fig. 1), of which 3.8% (4 of 105) would have been clinically significant disease. This 
is far better than the performance of the standard 12-core biopsy, which misses 50% to 
80% of clinically significant disease if present.19 Abd-Alazeez et al recently reported that 
MP-MRI had 89% to 100% negative predictive value to rule out clinically significant CaP 
in patients with negative MP-MRI who underwent template mapping biopsy.20 This supports 
the possible notion that biopsy may not be necessary in men with increased PSA and 
negative prostate MRI. In the near future if an image guided approach to CaP screening is 
implemented, the cost savings from eliminating unnecessary biopsies, over diagnosis and 
unnecessary treatment, biopsy complications and emotional distress in patients could offset 
the cost of the MR/TRUS fusion biopsy approach.

CONCLUSIONS

Given the limitations of PSA and the recent USPSTF recommendation against PSA based 
screening, a new paradigm for CaP screening and diagnosis is needed to improve patient 
selection for biopsy, treatment and/or observation. The combination of advances in MP-MRI 
and MRI/TRUS fusion guided prostate biopsy technologies have laid the foundation for a 
new approach to CaP detection and treatment by overcoming the inherent sampling errors 
and over diagnosis of low grade CaP associated with current strategies. This paradigm may 
aid in the accurate selection of men for CaP screening and possibly improve treatment 
decisions and outcomes.17
