Introduction
The need to address health-care issues in older people with cancer is growing as the global population ages. Older people typically have greater adverse effects from cancer and cancer treatment due to age-related vulnerabilities, including medical, functional, cognitive, nutritional, and psychosocial issues.1 These vulnerabilities have been associated with negative health outcomes in older patients with cancer, including decreased health-related quality of life (HRQOL) and increased mortality, treatment-related complications, hospitalisations, and admissions to long-term care.2,  3,  4,  5,  6 HRQOL is of particular relevance to older people with cancer owing to their higher risk of treatment-related toxicity. HRQOL is known to be negatively affected by chemotherapy, but this effect has been shown to be mostly resolved by 18 months in older women receiving chemotherapy for early breast cancer.7 In older people with incurable disease, HRQOL is often prioritised as the preferred outcome of treatment, especially if treatment also affects functioning, cognition, and independence.8
An integrated oncogeriatric approach provides coordinated health-care delivery to address cancer and age-related needs, and offers a person-centred framework to improve outcomes for older people with cancer.9 Core components of this approach include comprehensive geriatric assessment (CGA) and collaboration between oncologists, geriatricians, and interdisciplinary teams.9 CGA is a multidimensional (usually interdisciplinary) process to identify medical, social, and functional needs, and to develop an integrated and coordinated care plan to meet those needs.10 Older people who receive CGA during their hospital stay are more likely to be alive and living at home up to 1 year after hospital admission.11 In geriatric oncology, the term geriatric assessment describes the multidimensional assessment of geriatric domains, with or without intervention planning.6,  9,  12,  13 Geriatric assessment has been shown to identify age-related vulnerabilities in older people with cancer, facilitate non-oncological interventions, and alter the oncological treatment for the benefit of patients.13,  14 The effectiveness of geriatric assessment strategies, which can range from geriatric assessment summaries provided to oncologists to full CGA by multidisciplinary teams or geriatricians, depends on the robustness of the process to optimise cancer treatment and health conditions and on their effectiveness in coordinating health-care services and aged care services using a whole-system approach.9 Several cancer organisations internationally recommend geriatric assessment in older people with cancer before the initiation of cancer treatment.1,  6,  14,  15 However, the integration of geriatric assessment into cancer care has been hampered, in part, because of a scarcity of robust evidence from randomised controlled trials (RCTs) about the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of geriatric assessment in improving person-centred health outcomes that are important to older people with cancer, such as HRQOL and functional status.

The INTEGERATE study aimed to evaluate the effectiveness of integrated oncogeriatric care to improve HRQOL in older people with cancer. We hypothesised that older participants (aged ≥70 years) planned for systemic anticancer treatment would have better HRQOL after CGA integrated into oncology care (integrated oncogeriatric care) compared with participants who received usual care only.
Methods
Study design and participants
INTEGERATE is a prospective, parallel, two-group, open-label, investigator-initiated, pragmatic RCT of integrated oncogeriatric care versus usual care. Eligible participants were aged 70 years or older, with histologically confirmed solid cancer or diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, planned for systemic anticancer treatment (cytotoxic chemotherapy, targeted therapy, or immunotherapy), had not received systemic anticancer treatment within the past 3 months, and were able to self-complete HRQOL questionnaires in any of the validated languages. Full inclusion and exclusion criteria are listed in the appendix (p 1). Because recruitment was slower than anticipated, the eligibility criteria of first-line treatment for metastatic solid cancer were amended after 10 months to include diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, all cancer stages, treatment intents, and treatment lines (appendix p 1). Detailed information is presented in the protocol.
Participants were recruited from two metropolitan teaching hospitals (Box Hill Hospital, Box Hill, VIC, Australia, and Maroondah Hospital, Ringwood East, VIC, Australia) and one outer metropolitan day hospital (Yarra Ranges Health, Lilydale, VIC, Australia), which all belonged to the same general public health service (Eastern Health, Box Hill, VIC, Australia). Oncology clinic lists were screened, and potentially eligible participants were approached by researchers with permission from the treating oncologists. All participants provided written informed consent before enrolment.
The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and International Conference on Harmonization Good Clinical Practice Guidelines. The study protocol and all protocol amendments were approved by the Eastern Health Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC; reference E20/1314), Monash University HREC (reference C14/1525), and the Department of Health HREC (reference Project 9/2014).
Randomisation and masking
Participants were randomly assigned 1:1 to integrated oncogeriatric care or usual care. Randomisation was done by a central computerised system with dynamic allocation based on minimisation (80:20 random element), to balance treatment intent, cancer type, physician-rated Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status (ECOG-PS), age, and sex, with factor weights 3, 3, 1·5, 1, and 1, respectively (appendix p 2). Group assignment was not concealed from the participants and clinicians. Only the statistician conducting the primary analysis was masked to group assignment.
Procedures
All participants completed baseline questionnaires to assess comorbidity (Charlson Comorbidity Index) and frailty (Geriatric 8, Clinical Frailty Scale, and Flemish version of the Triage Risk Screening Tool).16,  17,  18,  19 Additionally, geriatric assessment data were collected as outcome measures—namely, functioning, mood, and nutrition.
Participants first received a booklet about chemotherapy and brief verbal encouragement about exercise and nutrition before being randomly assigned to either the integrated oncogeriatric care group or usual care group. Participants in the integrated oncogeriatric care group received CGA integrated into oncology care. The CGA consisted of a standardised panel of geriatric assessment questionnaires (those collected at baseline as study outcome measures and additional geriatric assessment items), followed by geriatrician consultation at baseline, and follow-up visits at 12 weeks and 24 weeks, with additional reviews as medically required. The assessment covered comorbidities, medication review, functioning (ie, physical, cognitive, psychological, and social), frailty, falls, nutrition, sensory impairment, immunisation status, advanced care planning, and chemotherapy toxicity risk. The assessment was done by a single dual-trained geriatrician-oncologist, who took on the role of the geriatrician and was embedded within the oncology service. The assessment was contextualised to create a personalised management plan, without a predefined intervention protocol. The consequent interventions addressed comorbidities, medication concerns, and geriatric domain impairments through direct actions of the single clinician or indirectly using multidisciplinary clinicians within existing health-care services and aged care services (appendix p 3). The oncologists continued to be the participants’ primary specialists.
Participants assigned to the usual care group could be referred to a geriatrician by their clinicians but did not receive the study-specific CGA. Clinicians were masked to geriatric assessment outcome data of the usual care group. All participants, regardless of group assignment, continued to receive usual oncology care, which included supportive care screening with the Distress Thermometer and Problem List.20
Outcomes
The prespecified primary outcome was the longitudinal change in HRQOL from baseline over 24 weeks, measured by the Elderly Functional Index (ELFI; score range 0–100), a 12-item, multidimensional, patient-reported outcome measure of functional status.21 A higher score indicates better functioning. ELFI incorporates four functional scales of the European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) HRQOL suite: physical, role, and social functioning from the core module (Quality of Life Questionnaire Core-30 [QLQ-C30]), and mobility from the elderly module (QLQ-ELD14). ELFI was chosen as the single primary HRQOL endpoint for four reasons: (1) it provides a more comprehensive coverage of the concept of functioning compared with its component scales with regard to geriatric oncology; (2) it gives more reliable measurement of the target HRQOL concept of functioning compared with its component scales, thereby reducing the sample size requirement; (3) it avoids multiple testing; and (4) it simplifies interpretation.21
Secondary outcomes include patient-reported HRQOL dimensions assessed using the EORTC QLQ-C30, QLQ-ELD14, and EuroQol-5-dimensions-5-levels (EQ-5D-5L); other patient-reported outcomes and geriatric assessment outcomes, including functioning (activities of daily living, instrumental activities of daily living, self-reported ECOG-PS, and self-reported Karnofsky Performance Status [KPS]), mood (Patient Health Questionnaire, 9-item version, and 7-item Generalised Anxiety Disorder scale), and nutrition (self-Mini Nutritional Assessment); anticancer treatment modification; health-care utilisation (emergency presentations, planned hospital admissions, unplanned hospital admissions, mean number of unplanned days in hospital, and time to unplanned hospital admission); overall survival; and institutionalisation.22,  23,  24 Exploratory outcomes included early discontinuation of planned treatment. Health-care and prescription cost data were collected and will be analysed separately in a future study.
All patient-reported outcomes were assessed at baseline, 12, and 24 weeks, with additional ELFI and EQ-5D-5L assessments at 18 weeks. Participants self-completed baseline questionnaires for patient-reported outcomes by paper on site and received and returned follow-up questionnaires by mail. When responses were incomplete, research staff contacted the participants to complete the assessment or documented the reasons for incomplete responses. Health-care utilisation, treatment, overall survival, and institutionalisation data were collected through medical records.
Statistical analysis
An effect size of 0·5 has been shown to represent a medium-sized clinically relevant difference in a meta-analysis of studies of HRQOL using the QLQ-C30.25,  26 This study was designed to detect a between-group difference in ELFI scores from baseline to 12 weeks, with a target effect size of 0·5 by independent t-test, with a power of 0·80 and a two-sided type I error of 0·05. Based on these assumptions and on the assumption of no dropouts, a minimum sample size of 64 evaluable participants in each group (or a total of 128 evaluable participants) who complete ELFI scores at baseline and 12 weeks was required. Study recruitment ended after sufficient enrolment for the target sample of 128 evaluable participants who had ELFI scores at two separate timepoints.
HRQOL data, including QLQ-C30 and QLQ-ELD14, were scored into scales according to EORTC standard algorithms.23,  27 Missing items were imputed (ie, assigned the mean score of the completed items from the relevant HRQOL scale when at least half of the items from that scale were answered; otherwise, the scale was set to missing). The ELFI score was derived from the summation of 12 items from the physical, role, and social functioning domains of the QLQ-C30 and the mobility domain of the QLQ-ELD14.21 Additionally, QLQ-C30 summary scores and Australian-weighted QLU-C10D scores were derived from the QLQ-C30.28,  29 For ELFI, the QLQ-C30 summary score, and the QLU-C10D, the outcome was set to missing if any component scale score was missing. The EQ-5D-5L data were scored using Australian weights.30 Missing items on the EQ-5D-5L and for other secondary patient-reported outcomes were imputed (appendix p 4).
We tested for significant between-group differences in change in ELFI scores using linear mixed models with random intercepts. Mean changes from baseline were analysed using a restricted maximum likelihood-based repeated measures approach. The models included continuous, fixed covariates of baseline ELFI scores and study group-by-time interaction, with random intercepts for each participant. An unconstrained covariance structure was used to model within-participant errors. For the F-tests, Satterthwaite approximation was used to estimate denominator degrees of freedom. For t-statistics, Kenward–Roger approximation was used to estimate denominators degrees of freedom. These models assume data are missing at random; the rates of, and reasons for, missing HRQOL assessments were summarised to assess the credibility of this assumption.31 These models were used to describe the time course of the ELFI scores, assess whether the time course differed between the two study groups by testing the study group-by-time interaction, and estimate and test between-group differences in change score at a priori specified timepoints via selected linear contrasts.
For the primary HRQOL analysis, data from multivariable models were presented as the overall main effect of treatment group as the primary comparison and, in addition, model-adjusted mean ELFI change score from baseline (estimated marginal mean adjusted ELFI change score for group, time, and baseline ELFI score) to weeks 12, 18, and 24 with adjustments for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure.32 The effects of clustering by centre were examined by intracluster correlation coefficient. The effects of clustering by CGA team could not be assessed because there was only one team. To aid interpretation of the primary HRQOL analysis, Cohen d effect sizes for significant differences in HRQOL scores were calculated using the between-group magnitude of change from baseline over time divided by pooled SD at baseline, with an effect size of 0·20 or higher deemed as clinically relevant.25,  26 The effect of group on ELFI change scores stratified by baseline ELFI scores was explored graphically using linear mixed models with fitted lines.
Early discontinuation of planned treatment was defined as discontinuation of primary treatment due to progression or toxicity within 24 weeks of treatment initiation, based on medical records. Overall survival was defined as time from enrolment to death from any cause or to the time of censoring of data on July 1, 2021. Time to unplanned hospital admission was defined as time from enrolment to first unplanned hospital admission over the 24-week study period. Institutionalisation was defined as time from enrolment to change of residence from home to residential care facility. Secondary patient-reported outcome contingency tables were analysed by Fisher's exact test. Health-care utilisation and chemotherapy modification over 24 weeks were compared by Poisson regression for rate outcomes and logistic regression for binary quantities to calculate incidence rate and odds ratios. Time-to-event data were analysed using the Kaplan-Meier method and compared with a log-rank test or Cox proportional hazards regression with hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% CIs. For the multivariable regression analyses, the randomisation minimisation variables (ie, age, sex, ECOG-PS, cancer type, and treatment intent as categorical variables) were used as covariates to adjust the estimates. Secondary outcomes were assessed without adjustment for multiplicity.
All statistical analyses were done on an intention-to-treat basis. The primary analysis was done using the R package lmer with R (version 4.1.2), and all other statistical analyses were done using SPSS (version 25). A Trial Management Committee monitored the study progress every 3 months. The study is registered with ANZCTR.org.au, ACTRN12614000399695.
Role of the funding source
The funders had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report.
Results
From Aug 18, 2014, to Sept 5, 2018, 154 participants were enrolled to receive integrated oncogeriatric care (n=76) or usual care (n=78; figure 1). Two participants in the integrated oncogeriatric care group withdrew from the study before CGA, and their baseline data were included in the intention-to-treat efficacy analysis. Follow-up data from one participant in the integrated oncogeriatric care group were excluded because of a new dementia diagnosis associated with incongruent responses to follow-up patient-reported outcome instruments. 13 participants had died by week 12, and 130 (92%) of 141 of the remaining participants completed at least two primary outcome assessments. All participants were included in the intention-to-treat analyses. At 12, 18, and 24 weeks follow-up, HRQOL data of 81% (124/154), 73% (112/154), and 68% (105/154) of participants, respectively, were available. Missing data were predominantly owing to death, feeling too ill to complete questionnaires, or refusing to complete the questionnaires (appendix p 5). Participants who completed all primary outcome assessments reported higher ELFI scores at baseline and had slower deterioration in ELFI score than those with missing data (appendix p 12).

Participants had a median age of 75·5 years (IQR 72·7–79·9) and a slight male (88 [57%] of 154 participants) predominance, and the majority of participants had an ECOG-PS score of 0–1 (123 [80%] of 154 participants), were planned for cytotoxic chemotherapy (124 [81%] of 154 participants), and were intended for palliative treatment (103 [67%] of 154 participants; table 1). Cancer types included lung (44 [29%] of 154 participants), lower gastrointestinal (26 [17%] of 154 participants), upper gastrointestinal (18 [12%] of 154 participants), and other types (66 [43%] of 154 participants). Overall, patient demographics, disease and treatment characteristics, and geriatric assessment domains were well balanced between the study groups, though HRQOL domains of physical functioning and emotional functioning favoured the integrated oncogeriatric care group.

In the integrated oncogeriatric care group, 71 (93%) completed CGA; three (4%) were too sick, and two (3%) withdrew before CGA. Most participants (68 [96%] of 71 participants) received CGA after treatment initiation. Median time to CGA was 14·5 days (IQR 6–21) after treatment initiation.
Both groups had declines in ELFI scores from baseline to follow-up visits, with the maximal decline at week 18 and the smallest decline at week 24 (figure 2). Linear mixed modelling of ELFI change scores over the 24 weeks showed a statistically and clinically significant main effect of group (t=2·1, df=213, p=0·039; effect size=0·38) but not time, and no statistically significant interaction between group and time. The adjusted ELFI change score in the integrated oncogeriatric care group was better than the usual care group over 24 weeks, with a maximal between-group difference at week 18 (mean difference in change 9·8 [95% CI 2·4–17·2]; p=0·010, corrected p=0·030, effect size=0·48; table 2).

Additional analyses stratified by baseline ELFI scores suggested that the between-group difference in ELFI change score over time was restricted to participants with baseline ELFI scores between 60 and 90 (appendix p 13). A low intracluster correlation coefficient by centre (0·019) was observed.
In the HRQOL analysis, clinically important benefits of the CGA were suggested for several domains with effect sizes of 0·20 or higher, but the only domain with a statistically significant effect was social functioning; deterioration was greater in the usual care group compared with the integrated oncogeriatric care group at week 18 (mean difference in change 13·5 [95% CI 1·4–25·5]; p=0·029; effect size=0·47; appendix p 7). There was no evidence for a statistically significant between-group decrement in any other HRQOL domain, although some results exceeded the threshold for clinical relevance (ie, effect size ≥0·20).
Analysis of other patient-reported outcomes showed there was a greater proportion of participants in the integrated oncogeriatric care group compared with the usual care group who self-reported a KPS of 70 (can care for self but cannot do normal activities or active work) or less at week 12 (15 [23%] of 64 participants in the integrated oncogeriatric care group vs 28 [47%] of 60 participants in the usual care group; p=0·0083). No evidence of a statistically significant between-group difference in nutrition or mood was shown (appendix p 11).
The health care utilisation analysis showed that the integrated oncogeriatric care group had fewer emergency presentations (–1·3 presentations per person-year at risk; multivariable-adjusted incidence rate ratio 0·59 [95% CI 0·41–0·85];p=0·0049), fewer unplanned hospital admissions (–1·2 admissions per person-year; 0·60 [0·42–0·87]; p=0·0066), and fewer unplanned hospital days (–7·0 days per person-year; 0·77 [0·68–0·86]; p<0·0001) at 24 weeks after enrolment (table 3). The probability of unplanned hospital admissions at 24 weeks was 42% in the integrated oncogeriatric care group and 57% in the usual care group (appendix p 14). After adjustment for covariates, group assignment was a predictor of time to unplanned hospital admission (adjusted HR 1·76 [95% CI 1·1–2·8]; p=0·019).

No statistically significant difference was observed in overall survival between the two groups; absolute difference at 12 months 9·9% [95% CI –5·2 to 25·1]; appendix p 15). Only five (3%) of 149 participants were institutionalised over the 24-week study period and, therefore, further analysis of between-group difference in institutionalisation was not done.
In the anticancer treatment modification analysis, there was no evidence for notable differences in treatment reduction, escalation, or delay between the two groups. However, exploratory analyses showed that participants in the integrated oncogeriatric care group were less likely to have early discontinuation of planned anticancer treatment at 24 weeks after enrolment (24 [33%] of 73 participants who started anticancer treatment in the integrated oncogeriatric care group vs 41 [53%] of 77 participants who started anticancer treatment in the usual care group; multivariable-adjusted odds ratio [OR] 0·38 [95% CI 0·18–0·79]; p=0·010; table 4). This finding was driven by lower discontinuation due to treatment toxicity (seven [10%] of 73 participants in the integrated oncogeriatric care group vs 27 [35%] of 77 participants in the usual care group; multivariable-adjusted OR 0·18 [95% CI 0·07–0·47]; p=0·0013).

Discussion
This study shows the effects of integrated oncogeriatric care in older people receiving anticancer treatment. Application of the principles of CGA and health-care integration in an augmented model of care led to better person-centred, treatment-related, and health-care-level outcomes.
The overall main effect of integrated oncogeriatric care in participants showed a statistically and clinically significant benefit of CGA over usual care for HRQOL, on the basis of ELFI scores. CGA reduced rates of functional deterioration over 24 weeks, with maximal between-group differences favouring the integrated oncogeriatric care group at week 18. The observed ELFI effect sizes were considered small-to-medium effect sizes in accordance with established guidelines for interpreting differences between groups for QLQ-C30 functional domains.26 ELFI scores were higher at baseline in the integrated oncogeriatric care group compared with that in the usual care group; these differences were adjusted for in the linear mixed models. ELFI change scores over time were non-linear, reflecting the surviving respondents’ experiences of the effects of their illness or treatment on functioning, and their subsequent recovery in health.7 It is acknowledged that the apparent HRQOL recovery in both groups at the later timepoints might not reflect the experience of non-responding individuals who were doing poorly or had died. Benefits of CGA were shown in self-reported KPS at week 12 and social functioning at week 18. We determined a positive effect of CGA on HRQOL, based on better ELFI scores in the integrated oncogeriatric care group compared with the usual care group and no detriment in any HRQOL domains.33
The functional effects of integrated oncogeriatric care were more evident in participants with baseline ELFI scores of between 60 and 90. Participants who were considered functionally fit (ELFI >90) or too frail (ELFI <60) did not appear to derive a functional benefit from the integrated oncogeriatric care intervention, although they might have benefited from aspects of the intervention focused on domains other than functioning. These findings suggest that vulnerable people might be the optimal recipients of CGA and provide a compelling case to use geriatric screening tools to efficiently target those individuals who will benefit the most from CGA, particularly when health-care resources are scarce.12,  14,  34
The integrated oncogeriatric care was also associated with fewer early discontinuations of planned treatment, and with fewer unplanned hospital admissions and unplanned hospital days over 24 weeks. Overall survival outcomes did not substantially differ between groups, which was mainly driven by the course of underlying cancer and treatment response. Altogether, our findings suggest that integrated oncogeriatric care with CGA reduced the functional impact of treatment, thereby lowering toxicity-related treatment discontinuation, hospitalisation, and related functional decline.
The multicomponent care model involved multidimensional assessment, geriatrician contextualisation and planning, implementation, and longitudinal follow-up. The CGA was done by a geriatrician who directly intervened (eg, managed comorbidities, made medication changes, and arranged care planning) or who referred to existing health-care services (eg, allied health, rehabilitation, or aged care) to create an interdisciplinary team to respond to individual needs. Notably, the study was not resourced for, and did not include, additional nurse coordinators or allied health practitioners. The logistics of clinical trial recruitment and intervention timing meant that the CGA in this study was a supportive intervention in parallel with usual oncological treatment and did not modify chemotherapy planning. Ideally, geriatric screening or assessment before cancer treatment could guide treatment decisions and influence outcomes.13,  14,  35,  36,  37 Despite CGA occurring mostly after starting cancer treatment, the findings suggest a role for CGA-guided supportive interventions to maintain HRQOL and functioning.
Several trials in older people with cancer showed that geriatric assessment performed by oncology teams before chemotherapy led to lower treatment toxicity, increased treatment completion, and increased communication about ageing-related concerns.36,  37,  38,  39 However, these trials did not assess or failed to show meaningful effects on HRQOL or hospitalisation, which are key considerations for older people with cancer.8 Two other studies evaluated the effects of integrating specialist providers of geriatric care into oncological care, which might be crucial to improving care at the interface of cancer and ageing. Our findings are similar to an RCT of 142 patients that showed geriatrician-led CGA increased completion of adjuvant chemotherapy and improved HRQOL (burden of illness and mobility) in vulnerable (Geriatric 8 score ≤14) patients aged 70 years and older receiving adjuvant or first-line palliative chemotherapy for colorectal cancer; no statistically significant differences were observed in hospitalisation.35 However, another RCT of 351 participants found that a nurse-led CGA model did not improve HRQOL in patients aged 70 years and older who were referred for chemotherapy for solid tumours, lymphoma, or myeloma.40 The INTEGERATE study has shown that an integrated oncogeriatric approach based on CGA led to better HRQOL and reduced unplanned hospital admission in older people with cancer receiving systemic anticancer therapy. It is possible that our study intervention, which embeds a geriatrician within oncology, allowed greater situational awareness, specialist contextualisation, and efficient care planning, thereby achieving better health service integration. Although the study geriatrician also had oncology expertise, the intervention involved CGA and the geriatrician did not have control over oncological management. Hence, the findings should remain generally applicable to CGA performed by non-oncology-trained geriatricians. Despite potential savings associated with CGA to offset intervention costs, it might not be feasible for every older person with cancer being planned for treatment to have a comprehensive assessment by a geriatrician in the context of a finite geriatrician workforce.41 Therefore, incorporating strategies, such as routine geriatric screening, digital data collection, and adding nursing or allied health staff to the process, could enhance resource allocation and long-term sustainability in the broader implementation of the integrated oncogeriatric care model.2,  12
This study has several strengths. The RCT design, in which randomisation was done using a central computerised system, minimised potential bias. The study was designed to be pragmatic and conducted in a real-world clinical setting involving a broad study population, meaning the applicability of our findings to other locations can be high and the intervention can be generalised to older people across many cancer types. Furthermore, HRQOL as the primary endpoint importantly reflects a person-centred perspective of intervention benefits.
However, these findings should be interpreted in the context of the limitations of the study. This study had a relatively small sample and was conducted at three centres. Further, participants and clinicians were not masked to group assignment. The primary outcome of HRQOL was self-reported, which removed observer bias, but knowledge of group allocation could potentially have introduced response bias. Informative missing data (missing data related to death or ill health), which is inevitable in this patient population, was greater in the usual care group than the intervention group at the later timepoints, which might create a bias towards a better HRQOL score in the usual care group. We observed a baseline difference of 5·8 units in unadjusted mean ELFI scores that occurred by chance, despite robust randomisation procedures and between-group balance for standard oncology covariates. Therefore, the primary analysis was conducted using ELFI change scores with the participants as their own controls, and baseline ELFI scores were included as covariates in the linear mixed models. It is also reassuring that the positively influenced HRQOL domains were clinically plausible (ie, positive changes were seen in domains that we expected would be improved by the CGA [eg, functioning], not in domains that would not be expected to change [eg, financial]) and supported by treatment-related and health-care-level evidence for intervention benefits. Safety data regarding chemotherapy-related adverse events were not collected, even though the intervention potentially changed the care pathways for participants. A single clinician did the CGA in this study, and therefore its generalisability to other settings depends on having clinicians with equivalent skills and motivation in performing the CGA. The multidisciplinary team involvement for some consequent interventions supports generalisability. Further cluster-randomised trials would help support the applicability of this model of care in other populations and settings. Although there were positive indicators for the effects of the CGA on health utility and hospitalisation, future work is required to evaluate the intervention components, cost–benefit, and cost-effectiveness of CGA, which will be analysed and reported separately in a future study.
In conclusion, integrated oncogeriatric care led to better HRQOL, fewer unplanned hospital admissions, and lower likelihood of early discontinuation of planned treatment in older people receiving systemic anticancer treatment. These findings, along with evidence from other randomised trials, support the implementation of CGA-based interventions for at-risk older people starting systemic anticancer treatment to improve their clinical care and health outcomes.