Comparison of plasma concentrations of levobupivacaine with and without epinephrine for thoracic paravertebral block: A randomised trial
Introduction
Thoracic paravertebral block produces somatic and sympathetic nerve blockade in thoracic dermatomes and provides effective intraoperative and/or postoperative analgesia for unilateral thoracic surgery [1], [2]. A systematic review has shown that paravertebral block is as effective as thoracic epidural block in controlling acute pain and that paravertebral block reduces the risks of minor complications compared to thoracic epidural block [3]. On the other hand, since the paravertebral space is highly vascular [4], injection of local anaesthetics into the paravertebral space may induce systemic local anaesthetic toxicity due to their rapid absorption. In fact, systemic local anaesthetic toxicity following a single injection and continuous injection of bupivacaine has been reported [5], [6]. With regard to the use of local anaesthetics, the long-lasting drugs ropivacaine and levobupivacaine, which are pure S(–) isomers, cause less systemic toxicity than do racemic compounds such as bupivacaine. Recently, ropivacaine and levobupivacaine have often been used for thoracic paravertebral block [4]. Although the pharmacokinetics following a single injection of ropivacaine into the paravertebral space has been examined [7], that of levobupivacaine has not yet been examined. To reduce the risk of systemic toxicity, epinephrine is often added to the local anaesthetics. While the addition of epinephrine alters the pharmacokinetics of local anaesthetics in most of peripheral nerve blocks, it does not alter the pharmacokinetics in subclavian brachial plexus block [8]. Thus, the effect of epinephrine may depend on the type of local anaesthetics, the dose administered, or the site of injection. If the addition of epinephrine decreases Cmax of levobupivacaine after thoracic paravertebral block, it may be a useful strategy to reduce levobupivacaine toxicity. Therefore, we examined the effect of addition of epinephrine on its plasma concentration of levobupivacaine, especially the peak plasma concentration (Cmax), after thoracic paravertebral block.

Patients and methods
This study is a randomised, single blind (participants) study. The research was conducted in Wakayama Medical University Hospital. The protocol for this study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of Wakayama Medical University (registration number: 1578) and written informed consent was obtained from all subjects participating in the trial. This study was registered prior to patient enrolment at the University Hospital Medical Information Network Clinical Trial Registry (UMIN 000021942; Principal investigator: A.Y.; Date of registration: 17th of April 2016). The procedures were carried out in accordance with The Code of Ethics of the World Medical Association (Declaration of Helsinki).

Patients
Male patients (ASA I or II) aged 21–79 years who scheduled to undergo elective unilateral pulmonary lobectomy or segmentectomy under general anaesthesia combined with thoracic paravertebral block were enrolled in this study. Exclusion criteria were as follows: inability to communicate lucidly, body mass index > 30 kg m-2, allergy to local anaesthetics, hepatic or renal failure, infection at the injection site, coagulation abnormality, and plasma albumin < 3.7 g/dl. This study was presented in accordance with the Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) guidelines. Patients were randomly divided into two equal groups according to the computer-generated balanced block randomisation method: one group received a single bolus thoracic paravertebral injection of 1 mg/kg levobupivacaine with 5 µg/mL epinephrine (LE group) and the other group received levobupivacaine alone (L group). AY conducted randomisation and performed the thoracic paravertebral block. Patients and YA who assessed postoperative pain were blinded to the drugs used for the block.

Procedure
None of the patients received premedication. After entering the operating theatre, standard monitoring including pulse oximetry, electrocardiogram, non-invasive blood pressure, bispectral index (BIS), and intra-arterial blood pressure (radial artery) monitoring were established for every patient. General anaesthesia was induced with propofol by target-controlled infusion (TCI, 3.0–4.0 µg/mL) and continuous infusion of remifentanil at 0.2-0.3 µg/kg/min. After intravenous administration of rocuronium (0.6 mg/kg), the trachea was intubated. Anaesthesia was maintained with TCI of propofol at 2.5–3.5 µg/mL, continuous infusion of remifentanil at 0.1–0.3 µg/kg/min and intermittent boluses of rocuronium. The TCI of propofol was adjusted so that the BIS was maintained within a range from 40 to 60, and remifentanil was adjusted so that blood pressure was maintained within 20% of the baseline values.

Thoracic paravertebral block was performed with an S-nerve™ transportable ultrasound device (SonoSite, Bothell, WA, USA) and a 6–13 MHz linear transducer with the patient in a lateral position and the side to be blocked uppermost. The same anaesthesiologist (AY), who was skilled in ultrasound-guided nerve blocks, performed the paravertebral block for all patients. After antisepsis, thoracic paravertebral block was performed at the level of the fourth or fifth intercostal space. A 22 G needle (Plexufix; B.Braun AG, Melsungen, Germany) was inserted and advanced in plane with the transducer, in a lateral to medial direction, under ultrasound guidance through the intercostal space [9]. After identifying transverse process and pleura, confirming that the needle tip had penetrated through the internal intercostal membrane and deep to the superior costotransverse ligament, 1 mg/kg of either 0.25% levobupivacaine with epinephrine (5 µg/mL) or without epinephrine was injected into the paravertebral space at a rate of 10-mL/30 s. The concentration of epinephrine (5 µg/mL) was decided according to previous reports [1], [10], [11], [12] and the manufacturer’s recommendation. Heparinised arterial blood samples (each 3 mL) were obtained for plasma levobupivacaine assay at 1, 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10, 12.5, 15, 20, 30, 45, 60, 90, 120 and 150 min after levobupivacaine bolus injection. Each sample was centrifuged at 3000 g for 10 min, and then the plasma supernatant was pipetted into another tube and the tube was stored at -60 °C until analysis. The plasma total levobupivacaine concentration including free form and bound form were measured using liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) with an electrospray ionisation technique. The LC was performed with Alliance2795 (Nihon Waters K.K., Tokyo, Japan). The MS was performed with TSQ Quantum Ultra (Thermo Fisher Scientific K.K, Tokyo, Japan). All samples were prepared using deproteination method with acetonitrile. Praziquantel was used as internal standard. The chromatographic separation was achieved on a XBridge C18 column (Nihon Waters K.K) with two mobile phases (A, 5 mM ammonium acetate buffer, pH adjusted to 5.2 with acetic acid; B, acetonitrile; A:B = 62:38). The calibration curves were linear between 0.5 and 2000 ng/mL with 1/X2 weighting (r ?  0.99).

Outcomes
Our primary outcome was Cmax. Several secondary outcomes measured, including the time to peak plasma concentration (Tmax), the area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC), and the postoperative pain. Cmax and Tmax for levobupivacaine were recorded directly from the measured values. AUC was calculated using the trapezoidal rule. AUC from 0 min to 30 min (AUC 0-30), AUC from 0 min to 60 min (AUC 0-60), and AUC from 0 min to 120 min (AUC 0-120) were compared. Postoperative pain was assessed using a numerical rating scale (NRS) at rest and during movement in the operating theatre when the patient had become fully awake.

Statistical analysis
The sample size calculation was based on findings of a previous study [7]. A sample size of 10 subjects was needed for detecting a minimum difference of 0.62 µg/mL of levobupivacaine plasma concentration with a power of 80% and an alevel of 0.05. Data are shown as means ± standard deviations. SPSS (SPSS In., Chicago, IL) was used for statistical analysis. The time courses of levobupivacaine concentrations in the two groups were analysed using repeated measures ANOVA. Statistical analysis of other data was performed using the unpaired t-test. A P value less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Results
In this study, 20 patients enrolled and completed the study from the 17th of April 2016 until the 18th of October 2017 at Wakayama Medical University (Fig. 1). There were no significant differences in patients’ characteristics including age, weight, height, ASA physical status, plasma albumin concentration, and haemoglobin between the two groups (Table 1).
Fig. 2 shows the time courses of arterial levobupivacaine concentration for 150 min after administration into the paravertebral space. The concentrations of levobupivacaine in the LE group tended to be lower than those in the L group until 60 min after administration. Table 2 shows arterial pharmacokinetic parameters obtained from Fig. 1. The mean arterial Cmax value of levobupivacaine in the LE group (0.48 ± 0.11 µg/mL) was significantly lower than that in the L group (0.71 ± 0.31 µg/mL) (P = 0.041). The maximum peak concentrations in the LE group and L group were 0.66 µg/m and 1.45 µg/m, respectively. The mean arterial Tmax value of levobupivacaine in the LE group (46.0 ± 35.6 min) was significantly longer than that in the L group (12.0 ± 7.2 min) (P =  0.008). In addition, AUC 0-30 in the LE group was significantly lower than that in the L group. However, AUC 0-60 and AUC 0-120 were comparable in the two groups.
Fig. 2. Time courses of the plasma concentration of levobupivacaine after the thoracic paravertebral injection.

Patients received levobupivacaine (1 mg/kg) with or without 5-µg/mL epinephrine (Epi). Dashed lines and solid lines indicate the time courses of the plasma concentration of levobupivacaine in the L group (n = 10) and LE group (n = 10), respectively. L: levobupivacaine; LE: levobupivacaine + epinephrine.
NRSs at rest and at movement were comparable in the LE group and the L group (mean NRS at rest, 0 in LE group and 0 in L group; mean NRS with movement, 1 in LE group and 0 in L group) when they were oriented to time, place, and person after emergence from anaesthesia.

None of the patients showed procedure-related complications including nerve injury, bleeding, local anaesthetic toxicity, and pneumothorax.

Discussion
Our study showed that the addition of epinephrine to levobupivacaine reduced the Cmax of levobupivacaine and delayed Tmax of it compared to levobupivacaine alone in thoracic paravertebral block. We measured the plasma total levobupivacaine concentration including free form and bound form, since most of published clinical data regarding plasma levobupivacaine concentration after nerve blocks were shown as plasma total levobupivacaine concentration [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18]. Therefore, we discussed about plasma total levobupivacaine concentration.

Epinephrine is often added to local anaesthetics to reduce systemic absorption by local vasoconstriction and subsequently prevent side effects. To date, the effects of addition of epinephrine on the plasma concentration of levobupivacaine have been examined only in transversus abdominis plane block [11], [12]. Those studies showed that the addition of 5 µg/mL of epinephrine to levobupivacaine prolongs the absorption half-life of levobupivacaine and reduces Cmax in transversus abdominis plane block [11], [12]. Our study showed that the addition of epinephrine reduced Cmax and prolonged Tmax of levobupivacaine in thoracic paravertebral block as well as transversus abdominis plane block. Although AUC 0-30 in the LE group was significantly lower than that in the L group, AUC 0-60 and AUC 0-120 were comparable in the two groups in our study. Thus, epinephrine was effective for decreasing the plasma concentration of levobupivacaine in the early phase (0–30 min after administration) but not in the late phase (30–120 min after administration). Systemic absorption of a local anaesthetic after extravascular administration is biphasic and related to the relative absorption from the rapid absorption phase and from the slow absorption phase [19]. Karmakar et al. examined the pharmacokinetics following a single paravertebral injection of ropivacaine [7]. They reported that epinephrine inhibited the absorption of ropivacaine from the extravascular space in the rapid absorption phase rather than in the slow absorption phase, reducing the peak plasma concentration of ropivacaine and prolonging Tmax, similar to our results. The addition of epinephrine to epidural ropivacaine was also shown to decrease the plasma concentration of ropivacaine in the early phase but not in the late phase [20].

The addition of epinephrine may potentiate the analgesic effects of local anaesthetics in a peripheral nerve block. Sinnott et al. showed that epinephrine potentiated a sciatic nerve block with lidocaine in rats [21]. Martin et al. reported that epinephrine potentiated an axillary nerve block with lidocaine in humans [22]. On the other hand, some studies showed that epinephrine had no influence on the analgesic effects of ropivacaine in a 3-in-1 block and an axillary nerve block [23]. These results suggest that the addition of epinephrine potentiates the analgesic effects of short-acting local anaesthetics but not those of long-acting anaesthetics. In our study, NRSs at rest and during movement after emergence from anaesthesia were comparable in the LE group and the L group. Thus, we did not find any advantages of the addition of epinephrine for analgesic effects of levobupivacaine. However, our methods to evaluate analgesic effects may be obscure. Therefore, further study on epinephrine-induced enhancement of analgesic effects in paravertebral block will be necessary.

There is another limitation of this study in terms of the dose of levobupivacaine administered. We used a relative lower dose of levobupivacaine (1 mg/kg) to ensure patient safety. When 1 mg/kg of levobupivacaine without epinephrine was administered into the paravertebral space, the highest plasma concentration of levobupivacaine was 1.45 µg/mL in this study. The plasma concentration of levobupivacaine to induce neurological symptoms has been reported to be above 2.62 µg/mL [18], which is higher than the highest concentration of levobupivacaine in our study. Thus, it cannot be concluded from the results of our study that the addition of 5 µg/mL of epinephrine to levobupivacaine can prevent the risk of systemic toxicity of levobupivacaine administered into the paravertebral space. But our results show that adding epinephrine has value in reducing the potential for local anaesthetic toxicity. It is necessary to examine the efficacy of epinephrine for higher doses of levobupivacaine or for continuous administration of levobupivacaine.

In conclusion, our results showed that the addition of 5-µg/mL epinephrine to a single bolus thoracic paravertebral injection of 1-mg/kg levobupivacaine significantly decreased Cmax and delayed Tmax of levobupivacaine. These effects of epinephrine may be a useful strategy for reducing systemic levobupivacaine toxicity.
