Intensive Lifestyle Intervention Reduces Urinary Incontinence in 
Overweight/Obese Men with Type 2 Diabetes: Results from the 
Look AHEAD Trial
Obesity and type 2 diabetes have long been linked to sexual dysfunction in men,1 and are 
increasingly recognized as independent risk factors for lower urinary tract dysfunction2 such 
as nocturia3,4 and urinary incontinence.1 Given that obesity is a modifiable risk factor, 
weight loss interventions targeting physical activity and diet hold promise for LUTD 
prevention and treatment. While studies have shown the benefits of lifestyle intervention in 
reducing UI in overweight/obese females with type 2 diabetes,5,6 few studies have examined 
the impact of weight loss in the treatment of male LUTD. In 2 population based cohorts of 
males, weight changes (5% of baseline or greater) did not influence the onset or progression 
of LUTD.7 With respect to type 1 diabetes, in the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial/
Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and Complications study randomization to 
conventional vs intensive treatment did not reduce the risk of moderate to severe LUTD in 
men.8 However, only preliminary research has been conducted in obese men with type 2 
diabetes,9 and whether lifestyle modification would have positive effects on LUTD in 
overweight/obese men with type 2 diabetes remains unclear.

In the current study we determined the effect of intensive lifestyle intervention focused on 
weight loss on the prevalence, incidence and resolution of UI, nocturia and daytime voiding 
in overweight/ obese men with type 2 diabetes. We hypothesized that lifestyle intervention 
vs control intervention would decrease the prevalence and incidence and increase the 
resolution rates of UI, bothersome nocturia and increased daytime voiding after 1 year of 
treatment.

Materials and Methods

Participants

Look AHEAD is a multicenter, randomized controlled study in overweight and obese 
individuals with type 2 diabetes which was designed to assess the long-term effects of an 
intensive lifestyle intervention weight loss program vs a diabetes support and educational 
control program on the primary outcome of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.10 
Participants were eligible if they were age 45 to 76 years and had a BMI of 25 kg/m2 or 
greater (greater than 27 kg/m2 if currently taking insulin). Exclusion criteria were high blood 
pressure (160/100 mm Hg or greater), elevated triglycerides (600 mg/dl or greater), 
uncontrolled hyperglycemia (hemoglobin A1c 11% or greater), a cardiovascular event 
within the last 3 months, significant renal or pulmonary disease, or conditions likely to limit 
adherence to the study intervention. Informed consent was obtained from all participants 


before screening, consistent with the Declaration of Helsinki and the guidelines of each 
center's institutional review board. Participants were randomly assigned within clinic to ILI 
or DSE with equal probability.

The Look AHEAD recruitment began in 2001 with planned followup until 2014 from 16 
clinical centers. Recently the trial was stopped after the data and safety monitoring board 
found no significant differences between ILI and DSE in cardiovascular events, which was 
the primary end point of the trial.11

The ILI was designed to produce an average of 7% or greater weight loss at 1 year.12 During 
the first 6 months of the program the participants attended weekly meetings and were then 
seen 3 times per month for the following 6 months. The ILI included individual and group 
sessions.12 Calorie restriction was the primary action used to achieve weight loss. 
Participants were given calorie goals of 1,200 to 1,500 if they weighed less than 250 lb and 
1,500 to 1,800 if they weighed more than 250 lb, with a maximum of 30% of calories from 
fat. ILI participants were instructed to consume a portion controlled low fat and low calorie 
diet that was supplemented with liquid and frozen meal replacements. Participants were 
encouraged to gradually increase exercise to 175 minutes per week using moderate intensity 
activities such as brisk walking. The DSE group was invited to 3 group sessions during year 
1 to provide basic education about diet and physical activity as well as social support 
opportunities. Participants in both groups continued to be seen by their own personal 
physicians during the study period for ongoing health care.

Measures

Measures were completed at baseline and 1 year by trained assessors blinded to participant 
treatment group. Height and weight were measured in duplicate using a digital scale and 
standard stadiometer. Demographic and medical history information was obtained by 
standardized interviewer administered questionnaires. Urinary incontinence, nocturia and 
daytime voiding were assessed by self-report questions. To classify urinary incontinence the 
participants were asked if they had leaked even a small amount of urine or wet themselves in 
the last 7 days (yes/no). To further designate leakage type (stress or urge), participants who 
responded in the affirmative were asked how often they leaked with “an activity like 
coughing, sneezing, lifting or exercise” or had “an urge to urinate and couldn't get to the 
bathroom fast enough.” UI was classified based on the predominant type reported. Nocturia 
and daytime voiding were determined using a single item question on a continuous scale. 
Participants were asked, “in the past 7 days, on average, how many times each day have you 
had to go to the bathroom to urinate a) during the day? b) during the night?” We defined 
bothersome nocturia and increased daytime voiding to be present (yes/no) when participants 
urinated 2 or more times at night (nocturia) and 8 or more times during the day (daytime 
frequency), respectively.13,14

Statistical Analysis

As a sensitivity analysis, men who completed baseline and 1-year assessments were 
compared with those who did not complete 1-year assessments of relevant baseline variables 
and demographic characteristics using chi-square tests for categorical variables and 


ANOVA for continuous variables. A similar analysis was made comparing ILI and DSE 
participant baseline variables. Subsequent analyses included only participants who 
completed baseline and 1-year assessments.

For UI, nocturia and daytime urinary voiding we compared the proportion of men in the ILI 
and DSE groups with prevalent cases at baseline and 1 year, incident cases at 1 year and 
resolution at 1 year. Chi-square tests were used for unadjusted group comparisons. 
Multivariable logistic regression models were used to examine the effects of the intervention 
on 1-year prevalence, incidence and resolution of UI, nocturia and increased daytime 
voiding. Three models were reported. Model 1 was adjusted for center site only, except not 
for urgency predominant type incident cases of UI and resolved cases of increased daytime 
voiding due to scant cases at some sites. Model 2 was adjusted for center site plus baseline 
incontinence/nocturia/increased daytime voiding (for prevalence only), age, race/ethnicity, 
BMI, diabetes duration, Beck Depression Inventory and smoking status. The third model 
pertaining to nocturia included model 2 variables plus sleep apnea and alcohol use (ounces 
per week). All analyses were performed using SAS® version 9.3 for Windows®.

Results

UI, nocturia and increased daytime voiding were assessed in 2,049 men at baseline (ILI 
1,027 and DSE 1,022). At baseline no significant differences were observed between the ILI 
and DSE groups with respect to demographic characteristics. Of these men 1,910 (93%) 
completed the same measure at 1 year (see figure). The ILI and DSE groups had similar 
completion rates (94% vs 92%, p = 0.06). Compared to those who did not complete the 
questionnaires at 1 year, those who did had significantly better blood pressure and Beck 
Depression Inventory score, and were less likely to smoke at baseline (data not shown).

The demographic characteristics of the participants who completed the 1-year followup 
instrument are shown in the supplementary table (http://jurology.com/). The overall cohort 
had an average age of 59.9 ± 6.7 years and BMI of 35.2 ± 5.5 kg/m2. After 1 year of 
intervention the ILI group lost significantly more weight than the DSE group (9.4% ± 7.0% 
vs 0.7% ± 4.5%, p <0.001). At baseline the ILI and DSE groups had similar proportions of 
UI (11.3% vs 9.7%, p = 0.25), bothersome nocturia (37.7% vs 38.2%, p = 0.82) and 
increased daytime urinary voiding (17.3% vs 19.6%, p = 0.18).

Prevalent UI at 1 Year

The prevalence of UI at 12 months compared to baseline decreased from 11.3% to 9.0% in 
the ILI group and increased from 9.7% to 11.6% in the DSE group (table 1). Thus, relative 
to the DSE group the ILI group had 38% reduced odds of prevalent UI at 1 year (OR 0.62, 
95% CI 0.43–0.88, p <0.01) after adjusting for relevant demographic and medical 
comorbidities (table 2).

The differences in prevalence at 1 year appeared largely due to differences in resolution and, 
to a lesser extent, new onset incidence rates. Specifically, among those with UI at entry, men 
in the ILI group had a greater likelihood of UI resolving (OR 1.93, 95% CI 1.04–3.59, p = 
0.04, table 2) compared to the DSE arm (56.0% vs 40.7%, p = 0.03, table 1). Also, among 


those without UI at study entry the ILI group had a marginally significant reduction in odds 
of new onset UI developing (OR 0.66, 95% CI 0.42–1.02, p = 0.06, table 2) compared with 
the DSE arm (4.5% vs 6.5%, p = 0.10, table 1).

Examining UI prevalence by type, the odds of prevalent cases of urge incontinence at 1 year 
were lower in the ILI vs the DSE group (OR 0.36, 95% CI 0.22–0.60, p <0.0001). The 
prevalence of urge UI decreased from 6.9% to 4.0% in the ILI group and increased from 
5.0% to 7.3% in the DSE group. Similarly ILI was associated with reduced incidence (OR 
0.37, 95% CI 0.19–0.72, p <0.01) and increased resolution (OR 2.93, 95% CI 1.19–7.24, p = 
0.02) of urge UI over 1 year. There were too few cases to model the odds of the prevalence, 
incidence and resolution of stress incontinence in these male subjects. We examined the 
relationship of weight loss and UI with multivariable logistic regression. We found that each 
1 kg of weight loss reduced the odds of weekly incontinence by 3% (OR 0.97, 95% CI 0.95–
0.99, p = 0.04).

Prevalent Nocturia and Increased Daytime Voiding at 1 Year

The frequency of increased nocturia (2 or more times per night) and increased daytime 
voiding (8 or more times per day) was similar in each of the groups at baseline and at the 
conclusion of the study period. In the multiple logistic regression model being in the ILI vs 
DSE group did not significantly reduce the odds of prevalent (OR 1.21, 95% CI 0.96–1.53, p 
= 0.12, table 2) or incident (19.6% vs 15.6%, p = 0.08, table 1) nocturia at 1 year. Similarly 
no significant treatment effect was observed for prevalence (OR 1.02, 95% CI 0.79–1.33, p 
= 0.88), incidence (OR 0.93, 95% CI 0.67–1.30, p = 0.66) or resolution (OR 0.79, 95% CI 
0.51–1.21, p = 0.27) of increased daytime urinary voiding (table 2).

Discussion

In this study of overweight/obese men with type 2 diabetes, randomization to ILI was 
associated with a 38% reduced odds of having UI at 1 year relative to DSE. The fact that 
10% of our cohort of obese men with type 2 diabetes reported at least weekly incontinence 
is noteworthy, as is the reduction in rates of incontinence at 1 year in the intervention group. 
The reduced prevalence of incontinence in those in our cohort randomized to ILI seemed to 
be associated primarily with increased rates of remission. However, there was also a trend 
toward lower rates of incident UI among ILI participants.

It is informative to compare these results with the UI female cohort in Look AHEAD.5 
Among men and women the 1-year prevalent cases of UI were fewer in the ILI groups. 
Interestingly while ILI primarily improved resolution rates in men, it improved incident 
rates in women. Thus, weight loss interventions may be more effective for the treatment of 
UI in men and the prevention of UI in women with type 2 diabetes.

Also of note, urgency UI was more prevalent than stress UI in men. Moreover, ILI 
significantly improved remission rates and incident rates of urgency incontinence in these 
men. In contrast, randomization to ILI did not affect the prevalence of nocturia at 1 year or 
the incidence of new onset or resolution of bothersome nocturia and increased daytime 
voiding.


Mechanisms are unknown for why weight loss may reduce urgency UI in men. Diabetes and 
obesity are known risk factors for LUTD.2,3,15–18 The pathophysiology of LUTD in 
overweight/obese men with type 2 diabetes is likely complex and potentially has 
interrelated, overlapping or disparate mechanisms. Diabetes is known to affect the bladder 
and prostate. Diabetes results in elevated insulin levels which can stimulate or accelerate 
benign prostatic hyperplasia development.19 Higher serum concentrations of insulin-like 
growth factor 1 and insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3 have been associated with 
an increased risk of benign prostatic hyperplasia diagnosis and surgery.20 Obesity and 
diabetes generated systemic inflammation may result in LUTD.21 Vascular insufficiency 
secondary to pelvic atherosclerotic disease caused by the metabolic syndrome may lead to 
ischemia and bladder dysfunction. Ischemia results in increased levels of transforming 
growth factor beta, leading to fibrosis, collagen deposition, smooth muscle atrophy, and 
subsequent reduced compliance and bladder size.22 Similar changes have been suggested in 
the prostate.23 In addition to inflammatory and hormonal factors, increased central obesity 
and the abdominal mass effect may contribute to LUTD. Urodynamic studies have verified 
higher filling and voiding pressures in obese individuals.1 Finally, obesity is a risk factor for 
sleep apnea, which can lead to increased nighttime voiding, and potentially to urinary 
urgency and frequency.24

To our knowledge this study was the first to examine the impact of intensive lifestyle 
intervention on LUTD in overweight/obese men with type 2 diabetes. Our findings suggest 
that in overweight/ obese men with type 2 diabetes a lifestyle modification program 
promoting weight loss should be considered a first line intervention to promote the 
resolution of UI. Given that the weight loss intervention did not improve nocturia and 
increased daytime urinary voiding, it is less clear how effective weight loss would be in 
preventing and treating LUTD other than urinary incontinence.

Our study should be considered within its limitations. These results may not be 
generalizable to the general population of overweight/obese people with type 2 diabetes or 
to overweight/obese people without diabetes. Our study participants were clinical trial 
volunteers and the exclusion criteria were relatively strict. We did not investigate how 
weight loss impacts other LUTDs such as post-void dribbling, weak stream or urinary 
urgency without UI. Our outcomes were based on self-report and were vulnerable to recall 
bias.25

In addition, our single item questions assessing daytime frequency of urination and nocturia 
differed slightly from previous self-report instruments, which may have impacted the 
validity of the responses.13,14 For example, our nocturia question addressed urinating at 
night but did not specify that the urination event caused a sleep interruption. Future 
investigations should include more extensive urinary outcome phenotyping at multiple 
points and objective measures such as voiding diaries. In addition, while the study 
completion rate was high (92% to 94%), completers had better blood pressure and 
depression scores, and were less likely to smoke compared to noncompleters. These 
differences may have biased our results. Lastly, we performed a subgroup analysis (male 
participants of Look AHEAD) which also could have introduced bias.26 However, given our 
large sample size and single subgroup, the subgroup analysis bias was likely minimal.


Conclusions

ILI was associated with reduced 1-year prevalent UI and improved resolution rates. 
Bothersome nocturia and increased daytime urinary voiding were not improved in the 
treatment group. Lifestyle interventions focused on weight loss should be considered for the 
treatment of UI in overweight/obese men with type 2 diabetes.

