Effect of Baimai ointment on lumbar disc herniation: A multicentre, prospective, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
Introduction
Lumbar disc herniation (LDH) is a degenerative disease that is closely associated with aging population. However, the incidence of LDH has been increasing, affecting not only middle-aged individuals but also young adults at an alarming rate. It has become a significant public health concern worldwide, imposing a heavy burden on individuals and healthcare systems. The 1-year incidence of LDH ranged from 0.1 % to 0.5 % (Kelsey and White, 1980), with approximately 4.8 % of men and 2.5 % of women over 35 years old (Vialle et al., 2010). In China, studies had reported a higher incidence in rural areas, with onset typically occurring between the ages of 20 and 40, and a higher prevalence in males than females. As early as 2015, the number of LDH patients had exceeded 200 million, accounting for 15.2 % of the total population. Therefore, it is crucial to take attention more seriously and focus on managing the entire process for timely intervention and treatment.

LDH has complex clinical symptoms, prone to recurrent episodes and tricky to treat. It is characterized by low back pain, restricted lumbar movement, and radiating numbness in the lower limbs (Haro et al., 2022; Kreiner et al., 2014; Spinal Surgery Group, 2020). The management of LDH-related pain is a significant clinical challenge. Surgical intervention is known to be effective, but most patients prefer nonsurgical treatments due to surgical intervention high cost and potential risks (Gibson and Waddell, 2007; Kawakami et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023). Studies have shown that between 78.2 % and 89.7 % of patients experience significant relief or resolution of clinical symptoms with nonsurgical treatments (Chen et al., 2018). Therefore, the development of more nonsurgical treatments has become an increasingly viable option to overcome this bottleneck.

Nonsurgical treatments for LDH are characterized by versatility, sustained effectiveness, and non-invasive nature. In China, the government has implemented clear policies for the development of national minority traditional medicine, promoting research on traditional medicine to prevent and treat major and prevalent diseases. Tibetan medicine is a significant component of national minority traditional medicine and is recognized globally as one of the four traditional medicines (Fu et al., 2020). External therapy is the most distinctive therapy in Tibetan medicine, playing a significant role in the treatment of orthopedic diseases. Baimai disease is a term used in Tibetan medicine, referring to a group of diseases that include the skeletal muscular system and the nervous system (Fu et al., 2020). LDH falls under the category of Baimai disease. Baimai ointment is a classical medicine used for Baimai disease, widely employed in the treatment of various skeletal muscular system and neurological rehabilitation conditions, demonstrating effectiveness and safety (Chen et al., 2022b; Li et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2021). While topical drugs offer a promising treatment option, the limited number of randomized controlled trial (RCT) has hindered their widespread use in pain management for LDH patients.

We hypothesized that Baimai ointment would effectively improve clinical symptoms in patients with LDH, including relieving pain, improving dysfunctions and lower extremity numbness. We conducted a multicenter RCT in mainland China involving patients with LDH to explore the effectiveness and safety of Baimai ointment.

Methods
Study design
The study was a multicenter, prospective, double-arm, double-blind (participant and investigator) RCT conducted from August 25, 2021 to January 31, 2022 at 8 Grade-A tertiary hospitals in China. The study protocol was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee, Wang Jing Hospital, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences (WJEC-KT-2021–033), and also by each center. Furthermore, the study protocol was registered in the ISRCTN Registry (ISRCTN11912818). The study followed the Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) 2010 Statement, which provided uniform standards for reporting clinical trials (Schulz et al., 2010).

Procedure
All enrolled participants were provided with a detailed explanation of the study protocol, prior to randomization. After written informed consent was obtained, participants were randomly assigned to two groups in a 1:1 ratio. The randomization sequences were generated and maintained by the Evidence-Based Chinese Medicine Center of Beijing University of Chinese Medicine. Professional statisticians, who were not involved in the implementation or statistical analysis, used R to generate the random number sequences and center code assignments. Similarly, the centers were assisted by the Evidence-Based Chinese Medicine Center of Beijing University of Chinese Medicine in assigning concealment. A total of two levels of blinding will be coded, with Group A and Group B denoting the first level of blinding, and then the second level of blinding will be performed by specifying the attributes of Group A and Group B, including which group apply the Baimai ointment or placebo. The assessors and statisticians, involved in data collection and analysis, remained blinded to treatment assignment throughout the process.

Participants attended three scheduled visits: baseline (-2–0 days), treatment (2-week treatment), and follow-up (1-week after the end of treatment). At baseline, relevant information was obtained through face-to-face interviews. Physical examinations were conducted, and anthropometric parameters such as height, weight, temperature, heart rate, respiration, and blood pressure were recorded. Imaging examinations and laboratory tests were performed to confirm the clinical diagnosis and safety of enrollment. The study overview and schedule were shown in Fig. 1.
Participants
Participants were recruited at outpatient departments of each center. The diagnostic criteria for LDH were based on the Chinese Pain Expert Consensus on the Treatment of Lumbar Disc Herniation (Cheng et al., 2021). To be diagnosed with LDH, patients should first be confirmed by cross-sectional images (item 6, magnetic resonance imaging [MRI] or a computed tomography [CT] myelogram) that demonstrated LDH at the level that corresponds to the symptoms. In addition, LDH patients need to meet any three items among item a to item f.

Diagnostic criteria: (a) Radiating pain in the lower limbs, with the location of the pain with correspondingly innervated area of the affected nerve; (b) Abnormal sensation in the lower limbs, with reduced superficial skin sensation in the corresponding innervation area; (c) A positive result in the straight leg raise test, Braggard's test, ‘well leg’ straight leg raise test or femoral nerve stretch test; (d) Weakened tendon reflexes compared to the healthy side; (e) Decreased muscle strength; (f) MRI or CT o shows a herniated disc with nerve compression, and the symptoms and signs are consistent with the involved nerve.

Inclusion and exclusion criteria: Participants aged 18–65 years with LDH were included. They had to volunteer for participating in the study, with pain and/or numbness and muscle tensionin in the low back or lower limbs, in addition to visual analogue scale (VAS) = 4. These subjects were excluded if: (a) they had a spondylolisthesis or herniated nucleus pulposus with severe compression of the cauda equina, or they had obvious indications for surgery and were not suitable for conservative treatment. (b) they had other diseases with low back pain, such as ankylosing spondylitis, etc. (c) they were allergic to Baimai ointment. (d) they had severe cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, liver, and kidney diseases. (e) women during pregnancy or lactation. (f) patients with broken skin on the lower back. (g) patients who participated in other clinical studies at the same time.

Intervention
The Baimai ointment consists of 11 herbs included turmeric (Curcuma longa L.), nutmeg (Myristica fragrans Houtt.), nard (Nardostachys jatamansi (D.Don) DC.), Actinolitum (Tremolite), liquorice (Glycyrrhiza uralensis Fisch.), Musk (Moschus), ginger (Zingiberis Rhizoma), Caraway(Carum carvi L.), Rhizoma Acori Calami (Acorus calamus L.), Sichuan Pepper (Zanthoxylum bungeanum Maxim.) and trona. The Baimai ointment and placebo (maltodextrin) were prepared by Gansu Cheezheng Tibetan Medicine Co., Ltd. (China). The placebo was designed to be identical in shape, size, odor, and color to the Baimai ointment. The placebo's matrix mainly comprises polysorbate-80, liquid paraffin, methyl 4-hydroxybenzoate, cetostearyl alcohol, butyl p-hydroxybenzoate, HR-S1, MG-319 and glycerol. Participants received daily applications of either Baimai ointment or placebo for a duration of 2 weeks. Moreover, the participants were instructed to apply 5–8 g to the lumbar region twice daily. For participants with lower back pain and numbness, the ointment was to be applied on both sides of the back from the 3rd, 4th, and 5th lumbar vertebra to the 1st sacral vertebra. For those accompanied with leg symptoms, such as pain and numbness, the ointment could also be applied to the Huantiao acupoint (GB30) on the affected side. In addition to the experimental ointments, enrolled participants can continue to take medicines for their underlying diseases, such as antihypertensive drugs, hypoglycemics and lipid-lowering drugs during the clinical research period.

Sample size
At present, there are no RCT of Baimai ointment versus placebo on LDH, so there is no direct reference, we estimated referring to published indirect evidence (Wang et al., 2015). The sample size was estimated using a difference test, taking into account the clinical expectations and outcome measures, using VAS or the relief rate of VAS (the proportion of the total participants with a pain reduction in VAS greater than 50 %) separately after two-week treatment. We assume a = 0.05 and ß = 0.10 based on an allocation ratio of 1:1. Considering a potential drop-out rate of 20 %, a total sample size was 26 cases referring to VAS and 194 cases referring to the relief rate. In addition, we still considered the relief rate of VAS was also transformed from VAS and realized that objective outcome indicator may be more conducive to judging authenticity and accuracy of research results, so VAS was finally used as the primary outcome indicator instead of the relief rate to allow for a higher saturation of the study results.

Study outcomes
The primary outcomes were lower back pain and functional status, which was respectively assessed the VAS (0–10 points) and JOA (Japan Orthopaedic Association) score (0–29 points). Participants were asked to rate their lower back and leg pain on the VAS at baseline, every day during the 2-week treatment period, and after 1-week of follow-up. The JOA score assessed various aspects of functional status, including symptoms, walking ability, and activities of daily living. Physicians recorded the JOA score at baseline, after the 1-week and 2-week treatment, and 1-week follow-up after 2-week treatment. Meanwhile, the secondary outcomes also cover level of lower back and leg numbness (assessed by 4-point Likert scale), the incidence of rescue therapy and compliance with health education, which were self-reported by participants. During the 2-week treatment, patients with a score of 4 = VAS score = 6 were given health education, mainly including wearing waist circumference, adequate bed rest and other measures. Patients with VAS scored = 7 will be treated with additional rescue therapy, including non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, dehydrating medications and hormone.

Quality control and data management
Quality control inspectors conducted regular on-site inspections at each study center to ensure that clinicians strictly followed protocols and completed test data correctly. The study date was managed online through an electronic system (http://112.126.58.121:8082/bmrg/login.jsp). Data entry adopts the method of two-person and double-entry, and the data was eventually checked for discrepancies. If any discrepancies were found, the researcher would correct them by consulting the original files. After checking all data manually and by computer, the database was locked for statistical analysis.

Safety monitoring
All participants were comprehensive evaluated for safety before the study was conducted, including routine blood tests, liver function tests, kidney function tests, and routine urine tests. These evaluations aimed to identify any pre-existing conditions or abnormalities that could impact the safety of the participants during the study. In this study, we similarly recorded the occurrence, severity, duration, measures, consequences, and adverse events. Special attention was given to assessing the severity of skin reaction symptoms, including subjective symptoms such as pruritus, pain or burning, as well as objective symptoms such as papules, oedema, blistering oozing, vesicles, ulcers, desquamation, and pigmentation changes.

Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS 25.0 and Python 3.11. Statistical significance was set at a P value less than 0.05.

Missing Data: We had strict requirements when supervising the filling of CRF, so the data acquisition about VAS and Likert scale was relatively complete. As for the JOA score, we found several cases where the total score was missing from the records. During the data verification, the JOA total score conflicted with the sum of subgroup scores, and we recalculated the latest JOA score. In addition, several participants did not record as for the incidence of rescue therapy and compliance with health education, and we default these were not carried out, which will not interfere with the analysis results. Therefore, we did not make up for the missing data with specific measures.

Analytical approach: To account for correlation among repeated measurements, intervention effects on these outcomes (VAS, JOA score, Likert scale) were examined by generalized estimating equations (GEE) with baseline measurement as the covariates. The group-by-time interaction, which indicated the difference for a given outcome between interventions over time, was considered our primary measure of intervention effects. The incidence of rescue therapy and compliance with health education were examined by logistic regression in consideration of the interaction impact between various health education measures. Categorical variables, such as the relief rate of VAS, the incidence of rescue therapy and adverse events were calculated differences with the chi-square test between groups. Meanwhile, the subgroup analysis of JOA total scores was performed using Mann-Whitney U test, regardless of the interaction influence of time and intervention. According to the Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials, as outlined at the International Conference on Harmonization E9 (Agency, 1998), type I error adjustments are not necessary if the objective of trial is to prove the effects on all primary variables. The purpose of our study was on the one hand to target pain improvement and on the other hand to target dysfunction with Baimai ointment, so we set up hypothesis test for both purposes, respectively. Consequently, no adjustments to the a were necessary for the two co-primary variables.

In addition, the CONSORT statement emphasized that the results derivation of RCTs should be considered in the context of clinical significance except for statistical significance. Therefore, the benefit should be clarified by minimal clinically important difference (MCID) from a clinical perspective (Kalkman, 2020). We used Chi-square test on the number of participants with MCID to explore the clinical benefit of Baimai ointment.

Results
Flow of participants through trial
In total, 228 participants were screened and assessed for eligibility. 34 participants were excluded because of unsatisfied abnormal laboratory test and inclusion criteria. All 194 eligible participants were randomly assigned to the Baimai ointment group (n = 97) and placebo group (n = 97). During the 2-week treatment period, 1 participant in placebo group did not receive treatments for personal reasons, and 3 participants in placebo group had bladder dysfunction score of less than -3 in JOA score. Therefore, 190 participants ended up, including 97 participants in Baimai ointment group and 93 participants in placebo group. In date verification, 3 participants in Baimai ointment group and 5 participants in placebo group were eliminated as for the elimination criteria. In the end, 94 participants in Baimai ointment group and 88 participants in placebo group were identified for analysis. The screening process for all participants was shown in Fig. 2.
Baseline characteristics of all participants
Detailed demographic and clinical characteristics of all participants were shown in Table 1. All participants were generally younger than 60 years (41.26 ± 13.92), with the participants in Baimai ointment group being older (41.62 ± 14.08). The majority of participants were female (63.19 %) and Han nationality (96.15 %). Most participants had normal BMI (18 < BMI < 24) and their temperature, pulse, respiratory rate, and blood pressure fluctuated within normal levels. On the whole, all participants had long disease course and time of onset. Several participants had a history of smoking (12.64 %) and alcohol (9.34 %). 67.58 % of participants were married, 56.59 % were bachelor's degree, 27.47 % were unemployed and retires. The majority of participants have no combined diseases, 8.85 % had hypertension, 2.75 % had type-II diabetes and gastrointestinal diseases.
Effects of the Baimai ointment on relieving pain
The VAS was the primary outcome measure to evaluate the improvement of pain, which was shown in Table 2. At the end of 2-week treatment (14th day) and 1-week follow-up after treatment (21st day), the decrease of VAS reached 39.57 % (95 % CI: 34.29, 44.86), 36.85 % (95 % CI: 32.04, 41.66) in Baimai ointment group and 29.68 % (95 % CI: 23.58, 35.78), 29.12 % (95 % CI: 23.10, 35.14) in placebo group, respectively. The intuitive decreased tendency of VAS levels in two groups were shown in Fig. 3A. After 2-week treatment, the relief rate of VAS was 30.85 % (21.95, 41.34) in Baimai ointment group and 22.73 % (14.75, 33.13) in placebo group, which had no statistical significance (?2 = 1.53, p = 0.217). After 1-week follow-up (21st day), the relief rate of VAS was 32.98 % (23.83, 45.53) in Baimai ointment group and 25.00 % (16.65, 35.57) in placebo group, which had no statistical significance (?2 = 1.40, p = 0.236). A significant group-by-time interaction indicated a difference for VAS between intervention over time (?2 = 26.81, p = 0.020). In addition, we also found the intervention effect and the time effect were statistically significant (?2 = 3.876, p = 0.049; ?2 = 385.74, p < 0.000). In separate effect analysis of intervention factor, the results showed that the adjusted net difference was statistically significant from 10th day of treatment until 1-week follow-up (21st day) (p < 0.05). Therefore, the results revealed that the Baimai ointment could relieve LDH-reduced pain and its effectiveness seemed to be maintained for at least 21 days.
Moreover, it has been found that the MCID is generally considered to be 2 points for LDH-reduced pain (Ostelo et al., 2008). We found that participants in Baimai ointment group had achieved this level from 13th day, while in placebo group did not achieve MCID throughout the treatment and follow-up period. We also found that the number of participants who reached MCID = 2 was statistically significant from 10th day until 1-week follow-up (21st day) (p < 0.05). The results also demonstrated that the Baimai ointment for LDH is not only statistically significant, but also clinically significant.

Effects of the Baimai ointment on improving dysfunction
The JOA score was another primary outcome to evaluate the degree of symptomatic improvement and functional recovery, which was shown in Table 2. The group-by-time interaction and intervention effect of JOA score indicated no statistical significance. However, the time effect was statistically significant (?2 = 68.90, p < 0.000). At the end of treatment (14th day) and 1-week follow-up (21st day), the decrease in JOA score reached 27.74 % (95 % CI: 23.05, 32.43), 26.25 % (95 % CI: 20.82, 31.69) in Baimai ointment group and 28.27 % (95 % CI:19.21, 37.33), 28.45 % (95 % CI: 20.81, 36.09) in placebo group, respectively. The intuitively increased tendency of JOA score in two groups were shown in Fig. 3B.

At the same time, subgroup analysis of JOA score was performed, which was showed in Fig. 4. The results revealed that the mean values for majority of indicators were greater in Baimai ointment group than in placebo group. It was worth noting that participants in Baimai ointment group performed better in terms of their daily ability improvement, which was statistically significant (p < 0.05), mainly including standing at baseline, low back pain, recumbent turning, washing, forward body leaning and sitting scores at 14th day, low back pain and washing scores at 21st day. In addition, a series of studies have suggested that the MCID for JOA score was 2.5 points (Chung et al., 2017). The results showed that the difference in the number of participants reached MCID = 2 was not statistically significant from 7th day until 1-week follow-up (21st day) (p > 0.05).
Effects of the Baimai ointment on relieving numbness
We used Likert scale to evaluate numbness improvement. Firstly, we found a decreased tendency in Likert scale as the duration of treatment increased, and the decrease seemed to be even greater in Baimai ointment group, which was showed in Fig. 5. Unfortunately, as mentioned in Table 2, the group-by-time interaction indicated not statistically significant. We also found that the adjusted net difference was uneven, and the statistical difference also fluctuated during the treatment period (5th day and 21st day). The results might not be informative, but at least revealed that the Baimai ointment on improving numbness symptoms was undefined because of the intervention period.
Compliance with health education and incidence of rescue therapy
As pain symptoms eased, majority of participants maintained a high-level adherence of health education, including wearing waist circumference, regular bed rest, and other measures. Although these results were not statistically significant, we still actively promote health education in the clinic. The results were shown in Supplementary Table 1. In addition, from the 8th day, few participants received rescue therapy, which partly explains the exact effectiveness of Baimai ointment on relieving pain.

Safety assessment
A total of 5 participants experienced adverse events (AEs) throughout the trial, including 2 cases in Baimai ointment group (eye irritation and cold) and 3 cases in placebo group (skin flushing). The overall AEs incidence was 2.75 %, with 1.10 % in Baimai ointment group and 1.65 % in placebo group, which was no statistically significant difference (p > 0.05). Furthermore, the National Adverse Drug Reaction Monitoring centre had not found any serious AEs occurring with the Baimai ointment by 2018–2020 data (Chen et al., 2022b).

Discussion
LDH is mainly manifested in long course, high recurrence rate, and poor curative treatment, which caused long-term suffering to patients. It is more common in males, with a male-to-female ratio of about 3:1, and the peak onset occurs around 40 years old. In this study, the average age of all participants is 41 years old, and there are more females than males. Prof. Pearson theorized that females with LDH may have more symptoms than males, but the exact reasons have not been conclusively established (Pearson, 2016). Therefore, this disparity in gender distribution may have influenced these outcomes to some extent. The incidence of LDH has increasing among individuals who have sedentary and desk-bound jobs, particularly among white-collar workers, due to the widespread use of computers and changes in work styles. Given the increasing prevalence, it is crucial to establish more effective treatments and rehabilitation measures to reduce the incidence and recurrence.

Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) is a valuable resource. Tibetan medicine, as an important component of TCM, offers wealthy clinical applications. The characteristic external drugs in Tibetan medicine can be combined with modern transdermal absorption techniques to provide localized therapeutic effects while also having systemic effects by entering the body circulation through the skin and capillaries. Baimai ointment possesses several advantages including ease of use, pain relief, swelling reduction, improvement of dysfunction, and it can bypass the first-pass effect, thereby reducing potential liver and kidney side effects (Liang et al., 2019). In line with the results of the study, Baimai ointment has shown effectiveness in relieving pain in patients with LDH.

The formula of Baimai ointment primarily consists of moderate medicines, accounting for 63.64 %. It includes 6 medicines that promote blood circulation, dispel cold, and relieve pain: Turmeric (Curcuma longa L.), Nutmeg (Myristica fragrans Houtt.), Actinolitum (Tremolite), Rhizoma Acori Calami (Acorus calamus L.), Sichuan pepper (Zanthoxylum bungeanum Maxim.), Trona (Fan et al., 2022). The Turmeric, Sichuan pepper, Liquorice, and Musk have demonstrated anti-inflammatory and other pharmacological effects. Curcumin is the main active ingredient of turmeric by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis, which is clinically used as a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (Buhrmann et al., 2011; Li et al., 2022). Sichuan pepper, and Musk are warming medicines with promoting blood circulation and relieving pain (Kim et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2014). In addition, Licorice possesses anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties (Feng et al., 2013; Naemehsadat et al., al.). More and more scholars have paid attention to the therapeutic mechanism of Baimai ointment in treating skeletal muscular system and neurological rehabilitation. Firstly, in terms of anti-inflammatory and analgesic, it could dose-dependently increase the threshold of mechanical pain sensitivity and thermal radiation in mice with chronic inflammatory pain, and had a clear inhibitory effect on foot swelling, and inflammatory mediators (Yang et al., 2022). It also exhibits significant activity in peripheral nerve injury protection, potentially through the inhibition of neuropeptides and chemokines expression and the regulation of signaling pathways involved in nerve function (Li et al., 2022). Secondly, Baimai ointment can improve microcirculation by dilating microvessels, increasing mast cells, promoting blood metabolism and tissue repair (Luo et al., 2008). It also has been demonstrated the ability to reduce blood viscosity in animal models (Chen et al., 2017). Thirdly, Baimai ointment has neuroprotective effects by regulating the function of the nervous system, maintaining the balance between inflammation and immune system, and influencing energy metabolism. These effects manifest as inhibition of neuronal apoptosis, promotion of nerve regeneration, reduction of NOS and NMDA levels in tissues, and facilitation of tissue repair (Liu et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2016). Overall, Baimai ointment exhibits pharmacological effects such as anti-inflammatory and analgesic actions, improvement of microcirculation, promotion of bone metabolism, and neuroprotection. Combined with the results observed in the study, it has proved that Baimai ointment is convenient and safe, which is worthy of further clinical application.

The results of our study align with several previous reports that have investigated the effectiveness of Baimai ointment in the treatment of LDH. Pan et al. found that Baimai ointment combined with thunder-fire moxibustion was effective in improving lower back pain and lumbar function, as well as enhancing the quality of life in LDH patients (Pan and Li, 2021). Pu et al. reported that Baimai ointment combined with acupuncture could reduce VAS and improve JOA score in patients with cervical spondylosis (Pu et al., 2019). Xu et al. demonstrated that Baimai ointment combined with electro-acupuncture and ultrasonic acupressure on LDH improved JOA score and reduced VAS (Xu et al., 2016). Our study employed a similar intervention period of 14 days, moreover, we incorporated a placebo control to ensure blinding, which adds to the strength and credibility of our findings. However, the specific duration of functional status improvement and numbness relief with Baimai ointment remains uncertain, as there are various factors influencing its effectiveness. While plenty of evidence suggest that Baimai ointment is effective in relieving neurological symptoms (Chen et al., 2022a; Lian et al., 2023), drawing definitive conclusions from a single study is challenging, and further high-quality research is warranted.

Several limitations of our current study create opportunities for future research. Firstly, the higher proportion of female participants in our study may have been influenced by the greater exposure of female patients in clinical practice and their higher compliance with the intervention. However, the latest epidemiological data indicated a higher prevalence of LDH in males (Vialle et al., 2010), suggesting a potential gender difference that may have affected our results. Additionally, females are known to be a significant independent predictor of patients with lower back pain (Vagaska et al., 2019), which could have amplified the effectiveness of Baimai ointment in relieving pain. Secondly, both primary and secondary outcomes, although measured by internationally recognized scales, remain subjective and susceptible to potential self-reported bias. Future studies could consider incorporating more objective outcome measures. Thirdly, cost-effectiveness analysis is not conducted in this trial, but it is crucial for the clinical application and dissemination of Baimai ointment. Finally, the 2-week intervention period with a 1-week follow-up may be considered relatively short for assessing the effects of Baimai ointment on LDH. While the current expert consensus recommends a 2-week treatment course (Chen et al., 2022b), future studies should consider implementing longer intervention and follow-up duration to explore the quantitative-effective relationship in greater depth.

Conclusion
The multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled trial represents the first evaluation of the effectiveness of Baimai ointment for LDH, which shows that patients treated with Baimai ointment experienced significantly higher relief rates compared to the placebo group. The difference of VAS between two groups reached statistical significance from the 10th day of treatment and lasted for at least 21th day, suggesting that the 2-week therapeutic benefit can relieve pain in patients with LDH. As for the relief of functional status, lower limb numbness symptoms, compliance with health education and the incidence of rescue therapy, our findings do not provide sufficient evidence to draw definitive conclusions, and further research is warranted.

In conclusion, Baimai ointment has demonstrated some effectiveness in relieving pain and exhibited a good safety profile, supporting its further clinical application. Based on the proven effectiveness observed in this study, it is reasonable to consider recommending Baimai ointment for the clinical management of LDH.

Funding
This study was supported by the Project on Improving the Evidence-Based Capacity of Traditional Chinese Medicine (ZZ13–024–7). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, publication decision, or manuscript preparation.

Data availability
The full data set will be hosted on http://112.126.58.121:8082/bmrg/login.jsp. All principal investigators will be given access to their own center's database. The data will be kept in storage for 5 years, which will be coded so that anonymity is preserved. The data that support the findings of this study is available on request from the corresponding author. The data is not publicly available due to their containing information that could compromise the privacy of participants.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Chuanrui Sun: Data curation, Investigation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Project administration, Software, Visualization, Writing – original draft. Kai Sun: Conceptualization, Data curation, Investigation. Shangquan Wang: Conceptualization, Data curation, Investigation. Yanguo Wang: Conceptualization, Data curation, Investigation. Puwei Yuan: Conceptualization, Data curation, Investigation. Zhenhua Li: Conceptualization, Data curation, Investigation. Shaofeng Yang: Conceptualization, Data curation, Investigation. Jianhua Zhang: Conceptualization, Data curation, Investigation. Yusong Jia: Conceptualization, Data curation, Investigation. Wei Wang: Data curation, Investigation, Investigation. Baoyu Qi: Data curation, Investigation. Bowen Yang: Methodology, Resources, Software, Visualization, Writing – review & editing. Jianping Liu: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing. Xu Wei: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing. Liguo Zhu: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing.