A Randomized Trial of a Practice-Level Intervention for Integrated Primary and Behavioral Health Care
The Annals of Family Medicine encourages readers to develop
a learning community to improve health and health care
through enhanced primary care. With the Annals Journal
Club, we encourage diverse participants—particularly among
students, trainees, residents, and interns—to think critically about and discuss important issues affecting primary
care, and even consider how their discussions might inform
their practice.
HOW IT WORKS
The Annals provides discussion tips and questions related
to one original research article in each issue. We welcome
you to post a summary of your conversation to our eLetters
section, a forum for readers to share their responses to Annals
articles. Further information and links to previous Annals
Journal Club features can be found on our website.
CURRENT SELECTION
Littenberg B, Clifton J, Crocker AM, et al. A cluster randomized trial of primary care
practice redesign to integrate behavioral health for those who need it most: patients
with multiple chronic conditions. Ann Fam Med 2023;21:483-495. 10.1370/afm.3027
Discussion Tips
Many Americans with chronic medical conditions also have
behavioral health conditions, including mental illness and
substance use disorders. Even the distinction between medical and behavioral health conditions reflects historically
siloed systems of care. Integrating behavioral health care
into primary care practices allows health care teams to meet
the physical and behavioral health needs of patients in 1 setting. The study authors evaluate the effectiveness of a toolkit
designed to enhance behavioral health integration in primary
care, in a pragmatic, cluster randomized control trial including 42 primary care practices. Their primary outcomes were
self-reported physical, mental, and social function and wellbeing among patients with chronic conditions.
Discussion Questions
• What question is asked by this study and why
does it matter?
• How does this study advance beyond previous research
and clinical practice on this topic?
• What is a cluster randomized controlled trial (RCT)? Why
do we see these often in the primary care literature?
• What is a pragmatic trial? How strong is the study design
for answering the question?
• Based on the inclusion criteria and patient characteristics,
how comparable is the study sample to similar patients in
your practice or region? What is your judgment about the
transportability of the findings?
• What is the Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement
Information System (PROMIS-29)?
∘ How would you determine the validity of this and other
instruments whose scores were used as outcome measures?
• What are the main study findings?
• To what degree can the findings be accounted for by:
1. Meaningful differences, if any, between intervention
and control practices or patients (see Tables 1 and 2)
2. The duration of the intervention
3. The COVID-19 pandemic
4. The inclusion criteria for patients and practices
in the study
5. The recruitment process for participating practices
and patients
• What is a Bonferroni correction? Why are these used in
statistical analyses? Did these adjustments impact the outcomes of the study?
• How do you interpret exploratory analyses?
• How might this study change your practice? Policy? Education? Research?
• Who are the constituencies for the findings, and how
might they be engaged in interpreting or using the findings?
• What are the next steps in interpreting or applying
the findings?