Validation of a real-time biliopancreatic endoscopic ultrasonography analytical 
device in China: a prospective, single-centre, randomised, controlled trial.

Introduction
In the past 40 years, endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) has become the preferred imaging modality for diagnosis of biliopancreatic diseases. It is considered to be the most sensitive modality for small (<1 cm) pancreatic lesions1 and minor (<0·4 cm) common bile duct stones.2 However, many studies have shown that the detection rate of biliopancreatic diseases with EUS ranges from 70% to 93% among different endoscopists due to varying competence.3,  4 Without doubt, high-quality EUS examination is required to obtain high detection rates.
Comprehensive scanning without blind spots is crucial for optimisation of detection rates. An excellent biliopancreatic EUS procedure requires the continuity and integrity of the scan, but two factors lead to blind spots. The first factor is the absence of standardisation. To standardise EUS procedures, a multi-station approach in biliopancreatic EUS has been established as the standard according to the Japan Gastroenterological Endoscopy Society and European and US experts.5,  6,  7,  8,  9 However, this approach is not consistently used because of lack of supervision and availability of practical tools.4,  10 The second factor is the difficulty in understanding the ultrasonography images because of, among other things, the subtleties of interpretation, small observation fields, and uncertainty in transducer position and orientation.11 Therefore, it is crucial to develop a practical tool that can monitor the blind spots and reduce the difficulty in image interpretation in real time to standardise the quality of EUS procedure.
Deep learning has been applied successfully to many areas in medicine.12 However, in EUS, most studies concentrate on diagnosis of lesions in static images.13,  14,  15,  16 In our previous work, we successfully developed a deep learning EUS navigation system that can identify the standard stations of the pancreas and common bile duct stones in real time.14,  17 Although our data presented encouraging preliminary results that the artificial intelligence (AI) device can significantly reduce the difficulty in ultrasonography image interpretation, the device has not been validated in clinical practice.
In this study, we updated our EUS-intelligent and real-time endoscopy analytical device (named EUS-IREAD) based on the biliopancreatic EUS station recognition models and a newly developed anatomical structure localisation model. We aimed to assess the effect of EUS-IREAD on station and anatomical structure miss rate to investigate its role in the clinical setting.
Methods
Study design and participants
This prospective, single-centre, randomised, controlled trial was done at Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University (Wuhan, China). For development of the EUS-IREAD, we collected the EUS image dataset from the previous study14,  17 and expanded it to develop a new biliopancreatic eight-station recognition module (DCNN 1: station recognition model). Then, we further trained an anatomical structure localisation module to visualise the biliopancreatic system, and it consists of four DCNNs (DCNN 2: pancreas localisation model; DCNN 3: blood vessel localisation model; DCNN 4: biliopancreatic duct localisation model; DCNN 5: kidney and spleen classification model). The specific corresponding relationship between the stations and anatomical structures is shown in the appendix (pp 5, 11). The two modules were finely trained according to the method described in the appendix (p 1). The EUS-IREAD workflow is shown in figure 1A.
Five datasets were used for training, internal testing, and external testing of EUS-IREAD (appendix p 1). In training set 1, 22 101 images from 469 EUS procedures from the previous study and 2520 images from 104 newly added EUS procedures were used to train DCNN 1. In addition, 9903 images that contained complete and clear anatomical structures from the same procedures were applied to train the anatomical structures localisation modules: 1588 EUS images were used to train DCNN 2, 2131 to train DCNN 3, 2755 to train DCNN 4, and 3429 to train DCNN 5. All of these images were taken at Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University between December, 2016, and April, 2022. In testing set 1, 2771 images from 88 EUS procedures were retrospectively collected for the internal image testing of DCNN 1. All of these images were taken at Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University between September, 2019, and May, 2020. In testing set 2, 4002 EUS images were retrospectively collected for the external image testing of the DCNN 1. All of these images were taken at the Union Hospital of Huazhong University of Science and Technology (Wuhan, China) between June and September, 2021. In testing set 3, 2747 EUS images from the same procedures as test set 1 were retrospectively collected for the internal image testing of the anatomical structure localisation modules: 500 EUS images were used to test DCNN 2, 760 to test DCNN 3, 1165 to test DCNN 4, and 322 to test DCNN 5. In testing set 4, 60 real EUS videos made at Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University and Union Hospital of Huazhong University of Science and Technology between December, 2021, and February, 2022, were retrospectively collected for the video testing of EUS-IREAD.
These procedures were performed with Olympus EU-ME1 and EU-ME2 (Olympus Medical Systems Co, Tokyo, Japan) processors and an adapted endoscope. The appendix shows the sample distribution for each dataset (p 6) and processing and annotation of the datasets (p 2).
Inclusion criteria for patients were age 18 years or older; consecutive patients undergoing sedated EUS procedures; ability of patients to read, understand, and sign informed consent; suspected biliopancreatic (pancreas and biliopancreatic duct) lesions due to clinical symptoms, radiological findings, or laboratory findings; and high risk of pancreatic cancer. Patients with high risk of pancreatic cancer were defined as those with known genetic mutations associated with pancreatic cancer risk (BRCA2, BRCA1, PALB2, ATM, and CDKN2A), familial pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma without known germline mutation, Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (STK11), Lynch syndrome (MLH1, MSH2, EPCAM, and PMS2), and familial adenomatous polyposis (APC), among others. Patients were classified into those with or without radiological findings according to preoperative biliopancreatic radiological reports. Patients with radiological findings were divided into those with pancreatic, pancreatic duct, common bile duct, and other lesions (such as gallbladder, ampulla, or duodenal papilla lesions suspected to invade the biliopancreatic duct) at the patient level. Exclusion criteria were absolute contraindications to EUS examination, history of gastric surgery, pregnancy, severe medical illness, medical history of allergic reaction to anaesthetics, stricture or obstruction of the oesophagus, and anatomical abnormalities of the upper gastrointestinal tract due to advanced neoplasia. Withdrawal criteria were premature termination of EUS examination due to oesophageal stenosis, obstruction, large space-occupying lesions, rapid changes in the patient's heart rate or respiratory rate, patient intolerance, or large amounts of food residues.
Four EUS endoscopists were selected from the Gastroenterology Department at Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University. Endoscopists were required to have performed 500–2000 EUS examinations and treatment. The experts of the independent data analysis team (JZ, WT, and WZ) were required to have performed at least 2000 EUS examinations and treatment.
The trial was approved by the Ethics Committee of Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University and under trial registration number NCT05457101 of the Primary Registries of the WHO Registry Network. The protocol is available in the appendix (pp 13−40). All patients provided written informed consent.
Randomisation and masking
Patients were randomly assigned (1:1) to either EUS-IREAD-assisted group or the control group by a dedicated research assistant. The random allocation sequence was a computer-generated random number series, and randomisation was done in block sizes of four. Because the dedicated research assistant did not know the randomisation rules, group allocation was concealed. Endoscopists were not masked to the randomisation status because of the requirement to do EUS with assistance of the EUS-IREAD system in patients allocated to the EUS-IREAD-assisted group. The videos collected were all original videos and did not carry any randomisation information, so the data collectors, the independent data analysis team, and patients were masked.
Procedures
Enrolled endoscopists were trained with the theory of the biliopancreatic EUS standard station scanning procedure in the form of slide (appendix p 11) and literature learning5,  7,  8,  9 1 week before the test. The endoscopes used in the trial were linear Olympus EU-ME1 and EU-ME2. Each endoscopist performed the routine EUS examination for the control group and was required to observe all standard stations and anatomical structures according to the prompts by the AI device for the EUS-IREAD-assisted group. The EUS-IREAD provides the following information to the endoscopists (figure 1B; video): exam duration; the current standard station and scanning progress; the anatomical structures observed and the sketch of all structures that should be observed at the current station; the anatomical structures captured in real time; and the measured values of the biliopancreatic duct diameter at the time of mapping provided by EUS-IREAD. In the control group, the dedicated research assistant would turn off the AI display to ensure that no additional information was provided to the endoscopists. After the examination, the dedicated research assistant would send the videos to the independent data analysis team for review.
Outcomes
The primary outcome of the study was the missed scanning rate of standard stations in the EUS-IREAD-assisted group and control group, calculated by dividing the number of stations that were not scanned by the number of stations that should have been scanned. The secondary outcomes were the missed scanning rate of anatomical structures in the EUS-IREAD-assisted group and the control group (calculated by dividing the number of structures not scanned by the number of structures that should have been scanned); the missed scanning rate per standard station; the missed scanning rate of anatomical structures in different standard stations; the missed scanning rate of standard stations and anatomical structures for individual endoscopists in the EUS-IREAD-assisted group and the control groups; and operation time. The operation time is the time used to observe the biliopancreatic system in addition to puncture, elastography, enhanced ultrasonography, and other observation of lesions or treatment. Theoretically, the operator should have completed observation of six stations and 17 anatomical structures in the stomach site, and two stations and eight anatomical structures in the duodenum site of a patient (appendix p 5). However, if the duodenal bulb or descending part could be observed due to patient factors such as intolerance, duodenal ulcer, significant mass, obstruction, or pyloric stenosis, the corresponding unobservable stations and anatomical structures were not included in the calculation. The biliopancreatic duct without opening Doppler was considered missed.
All EUS original videos included in the analysis were retrieved and independently reviewed by two EUS experts in the independent data analysis team. The observed stations and structures of the case were considered to have been scanned or not scanned when the two experts reached an agreement. In case of disagreement, the third expert for review was consulted, until a consensus was reached. The endoscopists who performed the EUS examination did not participate in the data evaluation.
Statistical analysis
To calculate the sample size with the primary outcome of missed scanning rate, we pre-analysed 129 patients (64 patients in the EUS-IREAD-assisted group and 65 patients in the control group) on Sept 30, 2022, to estimate the parameters because there is no literature on the effect of AI on EUS quality. The results showed that the missed station scanning rate was 5% in the EUS-IREAD-assisted group and 16% in the control group. According to the Z test (unpooled) test type of two-independent proportions, assuming the two-sided significance level of 5% (α=5%), the power value of 80%, and the dropout rate of 10%, 264 patients were required in total (132 patients per study group). Outcomes were analysed in the per-protocol population, defined as patients who underwent EUS procedure in accordance with the assigned intervention. Means (with SDs) and medians (with IQRs) are presented for continuous variables. The classification variables are summarised by frequency and percentage. We used the Student's t test, with a two-sided significance level of 0·05, to compare the measurement outcomes between the two groups and the χ2 test to compare the categorical outcomes. A two-sided p value of less than 0·05 was considered to be significant. We calculated the 95% CIs for the individual rate for model accuracy, 95% CIs for the rate differences of the missed scanning rates of stations and anatomical structures, and 95% CIs for the mean operating time between the two groups. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% CIs, the diagnostic rate of lesions between the EUS-IREAD-assisted group and the control group, and the primary outcome by sex and age (<40 years vs ≥40 years) were post-hoc analyses. The sample size calculation was done using an online power calculator (PASS, version 15). We calculated the 95% CIs for the rate differences using Microsoft Excel (version 2019). Other analyses were done using IBM SPSS (version 22).
This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT05457101.
Role of the funding source
The funder had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report.
Results
DCNN 1 reached an accuracy of 95% (95% CI 94–95) on classifying eight stations in the internal images test datasets and 89% (89–91) on classifying eight stations in the external images test datasets (table 1; appendix p 12). DCNN 2 reached a dice of 0·80 for the segmentation of the pancreas, DCNN 3 reached a dice of 0·76 for the segmentation of blood vessels, and DCNN 4 reached a dice of 0·68 for the segmentation of the biliopancreatic duct (table 1; appendix p 12). DCNN 5 achieved 93% (95% CI 91–96) accuracy on classifying the kidney and spleen (table 1; appendix p 12). Among the 60 real EUS videos, EUS-IREAD detected standard stations with an average accuracy of 93% (95% Cl 91–96), with individual accuracies ranging from 87% (78–96) to 100% (100−100) for each station (table 1; appendix p 12).
Between July 9, 2022, and Feb 28, 2023, 297 patients were recruited, and 148 were randomly assigned to the EUS-IREAD-assisted group and 149 to the control group (figure 2). After randomisation, four patients in the EUS-IREAD-assisted group and three patients in the control group were excluded because they had oesophageal stenosis, obstruction, or large space-occupying lesions, intolerance, or large amounts of food residues (figure 2; table 2). Of the remaining 290 patients (mean age 55·93 years [SD 14·06], 152 [52%] male, and 138 [48%] female; table 2), 11 patients did not complete the duodenal stations scan because of large duodenal lesions (n=1), pyloric stenosis (n=3), and patient intolerance (n=7; figure 2). A total of 144 patients, 1142 stations, and 3421 anatomical structures in the EUS-IREAD-assisted group, and 146 patients, 1156 stations, and 3462 anatomical structures in the control group were included in the final analysis. Baseline characteristics are shown in table 2.
The mean missed scanning rate of stations was significantly lower in the EUS-IREAD-assisted group than in the control group (4·5% [SD 0·8] vs 14·3% [1·0]; difference –9·8% [95% Cl –12·2 to –7·5]; OR 3·6 [95% Cl 2·6 to 4·9], p<0·0001; table 3). The proportion of missed duodenal stations was significantly lower in the EUS-IREAD assisted group than in the control group (9·7% [SD 0·6] vs 21·1% [0·7]; –11·4% [95% CI –17·3 to –5·4]; OR 2·5 [95% Cl 1·5 to 4·1], p=0·0002); table 3). In the gastric sites, the missed scanning rates gap was significantly lower at all stations in the EUS-IREAD-assisted group than in the control group (2·8% [SD 0·4] vs 12·1% [0·8]; –9·3% [95% CI –11·7 to –6·9]; OR 4·8 [95% Cl 3·1 to 7·6], p<0·0001), especially the liver station (Table 3, Table 4).
The mean missed scanning rate of anatomical structures in the EUS-IREAD-assisted group was also lower than in the control group (6·2% [SD 2·8] vs 17·4% [3·2]; –11·2% [95% Cl –12·7 to –9·7]; OR 3·2 [95% Cl 2·7 to 3·8], p<0·0001; table 3). The EUS-IREAD-assisted group had significantly better scanning integrity of the pancreas, blood vessels, biliopancreatic duct, and kidney and spleen than the control group (table 3).
Comparing the missed rates of the stations and anatomical structures with or without EUS-IREAD assistance by the four enrolled endoscopists, the missed rate of stations was significantly reduced among the four endoscopists with the assistance of the EUS-IREAD compared with no assistance (appendix p 7). No difference was seen in the average operation time of the control group and the EUS-IREAD-assisted group (table 3). No significant adverse event was found during the study.
The diagnostic rate of the common bile duct, pancreatic duct, and pancreatic diseases in the EUS-IREAD-assisted group was slightly higher than that in the control group, but the difference was not significant (appendix pp 3, 9).
The mean missed scanning rates of stations and anatomical structures in the EUS-IREAD assisted group were all significantly less than those in the control group in males and females and at age younger 40 years and 40 years or older (appendix pp 3, 8).
Discussion
In this study, we constructed a deep learning-based system, EUS-IREAD, to prompt stations and recognise anatomical structures during the linear biliopancreatic EUS examination in real time. This AI device played a part in monitoring the blind spots and assisting US image interpretation. In the single-centre, randomised, controlled trial to evaluate its effectiveness and feasibility, we found that EUS-IREAD can effectively reduce the blind spots and improve the quality of EUS examinations. To our knowledge, this is the first time a deep learning-based system has been used to monitor the quality of EUS examinations and validate its efficiency in a single-centre, randomised, controlled trial.
In the past 10 years, research into the application of DCNN in endoscopy and computer-aided diagnosis of lesions in EUS examination has received increasing attention. Zhu and colleagues18 used support vector machines to perform differential diagnoses between pancreatic ductal carcinoma and focal chronic pancreatitis. Marya and colleagues16 constructed a deep learning model that can accurately distinguish autoimmune pancreatitis, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, chronic pancreatitis, and normal pancreas. However, almost no research has been done to determine the quality differences in EUS examination.
Scanning without blind spots is crucial for EUS examination of the biliopancreatic system. The American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy and the European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy Quality Working Group recommends that the observation should be achieved without blind spots.19,  20 In the multi-station approach, a complete scanning of the biliopancreatic system should be carried out from both the stomach and duodenum: the body and tail of the pancreas should be observed from the stomach, and the uncinate process and the head of the pancreas, the bile duct, and the ampulla should be observed from the duodenum.8 We believe that most advanced endoscopists have mastered the observation technique at all stations. But in clinical practice, adherence to quality control indicators is poor because of lack of supervision and the busy, fast-paced environment, which is a common phenomenon in the field of endoscopy. For example, the guidelines recommend that colonoscopy withdrawal time should be longer than 6 min, but still half of all endoscopists do not meet this criterion.21 For EUS examination, the endoscopists will ignore some stations that can observe different angles of important structures. In a clinical study, only 49% of endoscopists met the predetermined criteria.19 However, after implementing performance improvement measures, the proportion of endoscopists who met the criteria significantly increased to 82%.19 Therefore, an effective surveillance tool is in great need in routine EUS quality control. In our study, the assistance of EUS-IREAD greatly decreased the miss scanning rates for all stations, which guaranteed the integrity of biliopancreatic EUS scanning. Our study indicated that EUS-IREAD system has the potential to be used as a practical and effective supervision tool for biliopancreatic EUS quality control in the future.
In all stations, the liver hilum is an essential site for observing the upper third of the common bile duct, whereas the duodenum is an important site for observing the juxta duodenal segment of the pancreas head and uncinate process, particularly the ampulla of vater.22 However surprisingly, our present data showed that scanning of liver hilum and duodenal stations was neglected for about a fifth of all recruited patients in the control group. However, with the assistance of EUS-IREAD, the missed rate was reduced to 7% from 23% for the liver hilum and to 10% from 21% for duodenal stations.
EUS has been hesitantly adopted by some gastroenterologists due to its steep learning curve and operator dependence.10,  23 As previously reported, more than 220 EUS procedures were needed for endoscopists to achieve competence, but 69% of EUS endoscopists performed less than 100 EUS procedures per year.10,  23 Therefore, a real-time EUS image interpretation tool could be beneficial to enable the widespread use of EUS. In our study, the EUS-IREAD recognised the current station, marked the boundaries of the anatomy, and then presented suggestions for further operation for next station accurately in real time. When the endoscopists cannot recognise the current station or need verbal instructions, they can obtain corresponding information from EUS-IREAD, similar to Global Position System navigation. Under the guidance of the system, trainees could become competent in EUS much sooner. A decreased learning curve means reduced training costs and more training opportunities. The endoscopists recruited in this study were all mid-to-senior endoscopists, so it is necessary to continue to explore the application of EUS-IREAD in shortening the learning curve of EUS in the future.
EUS-guided interventions, such as tumour diagnosis with fine-needle aspiration or biopsy and biliary or pancreatic duct drainage, have a positive effect on the diagnostic and therapeutic strategy for biliopancreatic lesions and have gradually become the central part of clinical practice.24,  25,  26 However, substantial variance was observed in the diagnostic yield of EUS-guided fine-needle aspiration, with a sensitivity for pancreatic malignancies ranging from 64% to 96%,24,  27 which is closely related to the experience of endoscopists. The endoscopists should perform a thorough assessment of the lesion and surrounding structures by EUS. At the same time, endoscopists are recommended to choose the suitable bile duct approach according to the bile duct anatomy.25,  28 Therefore, comprehensive scanning of the important anatomical structures around the biliopancreatic system is crucial for the puncture routes selection. Our study showed that the EUS-IREAD system can significantly reduce the missed scanning rates of anatomical structures, especially the biliopancreatic duct. The missing scanning rate of the biliopancreatic duct was calculated strictly—if the biliopancreatic duct without opening Doppler was scanned, it would be considered missed. Therefore, the missed scan rate was still as high as 10% in the EUS-IREAD-assisted group. This is because Doppler can better distinguish biliopancreatic duct from vessels and lesions, especially during puncture, which can reduce the risk of puncture. Therefore, EUS- IREAD can be used as a powerful tool to guide EUS puncture in the future.
Despite all above strengths, we acknowledge certain limitations of this study. First, considering this is a single-centre trial, a multi-centre, prospective clinical trial should be further implemented to evaluate the performance and robustness of EUS-IREAD with a larger sample size and sample diversity. Second, our results were only achieved from Olympus endoscopes. Other vendors should be included.
In summary, the EUS-IREAD can prompt standard stations and anatomical structures during EUS in real time. Findings from our single-centre, randomised, controlled trial support its capability to monitor the blind areas and reduce the miss rates of stations and structures in the EUS procedure. The EUS-IREAD has the potential to play an essential part in EUS quality control.