Statin Drug Use Is Not Associated with Prostate Cancer Risk in 
Men who are Regularly Screened 
Introduction 
Several prospective cohort studies support that men who use cholesterol-lowering statin 
drugs (HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors), especially for a longer duration, have a lower risk 
of prostate cancer with a more aggressive phenotype (1–3), or of prostate cancer diagnosed 
at a more advanced stage in the absence of screening (4). In contrast, the association 
between statin use and prostate cancer overall, and especially early-stage disease, has not 
been consistent (1). The lack of consistency may have arisen from differences in the extent 
to which a complex set of detection biases are operating. Detection bias in these studies 
could result from the possible influence of statins on serum PSA (5, 6) and from the 
tendency for men seeking medical care to receive regular screening for both elevated 
cholesterol and PSA (7). 

To evaluate whether statins influence prostate cancer risk in the setting of regular screening 
for the disease, and in which detection bias is less likely to be operating, we conducted a 
prospective cohort study in the placebo arm of the Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial. Unlike 
standard cohorts, the PCPT protocol called for annual PSA screening and prostate digital-
rectal examination during the seven years of the trial (8). Thus, the opportunity to detect 
prostate cancer was less influenced by factors (e.g., medical care uptake) that may be 
correlated with statin use than in other studies. 

Methods 

Study design and population 

We included in this prospective cohort study all men randomized to the placebo arm of the 
multi-center SWOG-coordinated PCPT (N=9,457) (8). The PCPT tested whether the 5areductase 
type II inhibitor, finasteride, prevents prostate cancer in 18,882 men aged =55 
years old with a normal DRE and serum PSA =3.0 ng/mL. To be eligible, the men could not 
have had a diagnosis of cancer, aside from nonmelanoma skin cancer. The Institutional 
Review Boards at the participating centers approved the PCPT. Approval for this secondary 
analysis was received from the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health 
Institutional Review Board. 

Assessment of statin use, PSA, and other factors 

The men were asked to complete a survey about demographic characteristics, lifestyle, and 
medical history during the entry visit. At most study centers, the men were asked to 

J Urol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 August 01. 


Platz et al. Page 3 

NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript 

complete a food frequency questionnaire during the next annual visit. At the entry visit, 
height and weight were measured using standardized protocols. Weight was measured at 
each annual visit. Waist and hip circumferences were measured at the first annual visit after 
the entry visit. 

At entry, current medication use was assessed by interview using both closed (e.g., aspirin, 
hypertension drugs) and open-ended questions. At each 6-month and annual clinic visit, and 
on every 3- and 9-month telephone call between clinic visits, the men were asked, “Have 
you started any new medications since we last talked with you?”. We coded as a statin any 
of the following brand or generic medication names: Lescol (fluvastatin), Lipitor 
(altorvastatin), Altoprev (lovastatin), Mevacor (lovastatin), Pravachol (pravastatin), Zocor 
(simvastatin), Baycol (cerivastatin), Advicor (lovastatin), or statin. Other cholesterollowering 
drugs (i.e., Gemcor (gemfibrozil), Lopid (gemfibrozil), Tricor (fenofibrate), 
Cholestid (colestipol)) and nonspecific drugs (i.e., cholesterol drug, cholesterol lowering 
drug, high-cholesterol drug) were not included. Because the interviews requested new 
medication use, to determine statin use during the trial and to calculate duration of use 
during the trial, we assumed that once a man reported taking a statin he continued taking it 
until the end of the trial. We also assumed that the date a man reported first use of a drug 
was the date he began taking it. We did not have information on use prior to baseline in 
1993–1997. The earliest possible statin use was 1987, the year first available on the market 
(9, 10). 

As a component of the trial protocol, serum PSA was measured in a central laboratory 
(Esoterix, Inc, Calabasas Hills, CA) in samples collected at the entry visit and then annually. 
Serum total cholesterol was measured in the sample collected at the entry visit (11). 

Ascertainment of prostate cancer cases 

We included as cases those that were detected on a prostate biopsy performed for clinical 
indication, usually an elevated PSA and/or an abnormal DRE. We did not include as cases 
those detected on the end-of-study biopsy performed without clinical indication per PCPT 
protocol (8) as these cases otherwise would not have been detected during the trial. The 
biopsies were reviewed by pathologists at the study center and confirmed by the Prostate 
Diagnostic Laboratory, University of Colorado. We used the Gleason score that was 
determined by central review. 

Statistical analysis 

We calculated age-adjusted means and prevalences of baseline characteristics by statin use 
during the trial using linear regression. We estimated percent difference in serum PSA 
(repeated measures) between use and never use of a statin during the trial (updated, but 
truncated at date of prostate cancer diagnosis) using generalized estimating equations with 
an autoregressive correlation structure. 

We estimated the hazard ratio and 95% confidence interval of total, localized (T1 or T2, and 
N0 and M0; N=507), Gleason 2–6 (lower-grade; N=351), and 7–10 (higher-grade; N=156) 
prostate cancer detected on a biopsy performed for clinical indication using Cox 

J Urol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 August 01. 


Platz et al. Page 4 

NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript 

proportional hazards regression. Few men were diagnosed with advanced-stage disease (5 
T3N0M0, 3 N+M0, and 6 M+) because of the trial eligibility criteria and screening protocol, 
precluding its analysis. We evaluated statin use during the trial (use versus never) and 
duration of statin use during the trial (never, 0 to <4 years, =4 years) as time-dependent 
variables. Time at risk began accruing at the trial entry date and ended on the date of 
diagnosis or censor, whichever came first. Men diagnosed with prostate cancer on an end-ofstudy 
biopsy that was performed without clinical indication per trial protocol (8) were 
censored at their date of diagnosis. Men not diagnosed with prostate cancer were censored at 
the date of the end of study (7 years) or at the date of their last trial contact. 

We report age- and multivariable-adjusted results. The final multivariable models included 
factors selected a priori based on their likely associations with prostate cancer and/or use of 
a statin: age (year, continuous), race (nonwhite versus white), first-degree family history of 
prostate cancer, body mass index (BMI, kg/m2, continuous), and self-reported diagnosis of 
diabetes mellitus, regular aspirin use and use of other NSAIDs, and history of myocardial 
infarction. Attained education, alcohol consumption, physical activity, cigarette smoking 
history, and intake of energy, saturated fat, fish, tomatoes, calcium, and vitamin E were not 
confounders based on the change in the estimate approach, and thus were not included in the 
multivariable models. 

We stratified by baseline serum cholesterol (cutpoint at 200 mg/dL, borderline high) and 
baseline serum PSA (cutpoint at the median, 1.1 ng/mL). We tested for effect modification 
by entering the product of use of a statin during the trial and baseline cholesterol or PSA in 
the model, the coefficient for which we evaluated using the Wald test. 

We performed the statistical analyses using SAS release 9.2 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC) and 
report two-sided P-values. 

Results 

23.8% of men used a statin during the trial. Compared with never users, users were more 
likely to be white, were slightly shorter and had slightly higher BMI, were more likely to 
have a history of diabetes mellitus and myocardial infarction, had a higher serum 
cholesterol, and were more likely to be aspirin users (Table 1). 

Statin use and serum PSA 

Adjusting for age, ever users of a statin during the trial (mean 1.19 ng/mL) had a slightly 
lower baseline serum PSA than never users (mean 1.24 ng/mL; P<0.01). When considering 
repeated measures of PSA concentration and updating statin use during the trial, PSA was 
2.7% higher in ever than never users after adjusting for age and race (P=0.0002). However, 
this difference was attenuated after multivariable adjustment (1.3% higher, P=0.09). 

Association between statin use and prostate cancer 

Statin use during the trial and duration of use were not associated with total, localized, 
lower- or higher-grade prostate cancer after age- or multivariable-adjustment (Table 2). The 
association between use and prostate cancer risk did not statistically significantly differ 

J Urol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 August 01. 


Platz et al. Page 5 

NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript 

between men with serum cholesterol <200 and =200 mg/dL at trial entry (Table 3) or 
between men with serum PSA below the median (1.1 ng/mL) or at or above the median at 
trial entry (Table 4). 

Discussion 

In this prospective study in the setting of regular screening for the disease and in which 
detection bias is less likely to be operating, use of a statin and duration of use during the trial 
were not associated with prostate cancer risk. Also, the percent difference in PSA 
concentration between statin users and never users was very small, a finding that helps to 
rule out a possible source of detection bias. We also did not observe evidence of effect 
modification by serum cholesterol or PSA measured at entry. 

In the setting of ad hoc prostate cancer screening, detection bias can result when men who 
seek medical care are more likely to be screened for both elevated cholesterol and PSA than 
men who do not seek care. These screenings increase the opportunity that a man will be 
prescribed a statin and be recommended to undergo a prostate biopsy. This source of 
detection bias would tend to produce a positive association between use and risk of prostate 
cancer overall, especially screen-detected, early-stage disease (7). Indeed, some studies have 
observed possible, very slight to moderate, positive associations between statin use and 
prostate cancer overall, and early-stage disease (12–15). Murtola et al. were the first to 
address this source of detection bias in depth by conducting a large prospective study in the 
screening arm of the Finnish component of the European Randomized Study of Prostate 
Cancer Screening (16). In the Finnish component, men were screened for elevated PSA 
every four years; the maximum number of PSA tests was three. In the screened men, statin 
use was not positively associated with prostate cancer as would be seen with this source of 
detection bias. Instead, use was inversely associated with prostate cancer overall, and with 
early-stage disease, in a cumulative dose-dependent manner (16). In the PCPT, we also did 
not observe a positive association between statin use and prostate cancer. In contrast to 
Murtola et al., use was not associated with prostate cancer detected on a biopsy performed 
for clinical indication, and risk did not decrease with duration of use, suggesting that statins 
are unlikely to protect against screen-detected, early prostate cancer. Differences between 
the two studies that might explain differences in findings include population (Finns vs 
Americans), background of regular PSA screening in the population (Finland-no, US–yes), 
screening interval (Finland–4 years, US–1 year), trial entry criteria (e.g., Finnish study–no 
restriction on PSA, PCPT–restricted to PSA=3.0 ng/mL), sample size (Finnish study–23,320 
men, PCPT–9,457 men), and source of information on statin use (Finland–national drug 
reimbursement database, PCPT-self reported medications use). 

Another possible source of detection bias in the association between statin use and prostate 
cancer is the influence of these drugs on serum PSA. In small randomized trials, serum PSA 
has been shown to decline in hypercholesterolemic men after starting on a statin (17). 
Likewise, several observational studies conducted cross-sectionally (18, 19) or 
longitudinally (5, 6) found that statin users have lower PSA than nonusers and that serum 
PSA declines after starting to use a statin. An inverse association between statin use and 
PSA concentration would tend to produce an inverse association between use and prostate 

J Urol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 August 01. 


Platz et al. Page 6 

NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript 

cancer, including aggressive disease. While Murtola et al. did not find a difference in the 
age-adjusted geometric mean PSA concentration between current statin users and did not 
find an association between the cumulative number of doses received over time, they did 
observe that in men who later were diagnosed with prostate cancer, statin users had a lower 
prediagnostic PSA than nonusers (16). In our study, which used repeated measures of both 
statins and PSA over the course of the trial, users had a slightly higher PSA than never users 
during the trial. This difference was attenuated and not statistically significant after taking 
into account factors associated with both use and PSA concentration, supporting that this 
possible source of bias in the association between statin use and prostate cancer, is unlikely 
to be playing a role in low PSA settings (e.g., those with regular screening). 

We stratified by serum cholesterol to determine whether statins may be differently 
associated with prostate cancer among those with and without elevated cholesterol. We 
previously observed in the PCPT that lower concentration (<200 mg/dL) was associated 
with a lower risk of high-grade prostate cancer (20), indicating possibly that low cholesterol 
rather than cholesterol lowering may be more important. However, statin use was not 
associated with risk, including risk of high-grade disease, either in men with lower or with 
elevated serum cholesterol. 

Several features of our prospective study require discussion. The PCPT inclusion/exclusion 
criteria yielded a study population that may differ from the general US population. 
Nevertheless, the men included in the PCPT would reflect healthy men who are regularly 
screened, and thus have lower PSA. We relied on self-reported statin use in response to inperson 
and telephone interviews conducted quarterly, and assumed that once a man reported 
taking a statin he continued taking it and that the date he reported first use of a statin was the 
date he began taking it. The prevalence of use at trial entry was low (2.9%), although during 
the trial the prevalence increased substantially and we were able to capture use and duration 
of use during the trial. Information was not collected to address the influence of duration of 
use prior to trial entry (i.e., between 1987, date of first approval, and 1993), or dose, or 
brand of statin used on risk. Any misclassification of statin use due to our ascertainment 
methods are unlikely to be differential with respect to future prostate cancer risk, and thus 
any resulting bias would tend to attenuate any association. We could not address statin use 
and advanced disease because so few of these highly screened men were diagnosed at a late 
stage. Prior prospective studies suggest that statin users, especially long term, have a lower 
risk of being diagnosed with prostate cancer that is already advanced. Because the trial's 
duration was only 7 years, we could have missed the minimum etiologically-relevant 
duration of use. Nevertheless, the study goals were to address the link between statin use and 
early-stage disease in a setting in which the potential for differential detection of prostate 
cancer between users and nonusers could be minimized. In addition, for some analyses, the 
precision of the HRs is such that we cannot rule out the possibility of modest to moderate 
associations. We could not separately study Gleason 8+ disease, the outcome most clearly 
associated with low serum cholesterol in the PCPT (20), because the number of statin users 
with very high-grade disease was small. 

J Urol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 August 01. 


Platz et al. Page 7 

NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript 

Conclusion 

Statin use does not appear to influence prostate cancer risk in a setting of annual screening 
and in which detection bias was less likely to be operating. 