Detection of bile acids in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid defines the inflammatory and microbial landscape of the lower airways in infants with cystic fibrosis
Background
Cystic fibrosis (CF, OMIM 219700) is a genetic disorder caused by mutations in the Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator (CFTR) gene, which consequently alters ion homeostasis [1]. In CF, respiratory complications remain the primary contributor to morbidity and mortality [1]. CF lung disease progresses early after birth, even in asymptomatic children [2]. Neutrophilic inflammation and recurrent respiratory infections lead to the scarring of the lung epithelia, which influences clinical outcomes of the disease [3]. Consequently, early interventions are required to preserve the lung epithelia until CF patients initiate CFTR restorative therapies.

In CF, genetic and environmental factors determine a distinct lung microenvironment characterized by mucus plugging [4] and hypoxia [5]. This niche shapes the airway inflammatory landscape by promoting both an abnormal microbiota [6], and the functional reprogramming of infiltrated neutrophils [7]. As patients age the CF lung microbiota transitions from highly diverse to pathogen-dominated communities [6, 8]. This shift is associated with increased inflammation and reduced lung function [8]. While microbial diversity could be a determinant of disease progression, this may be confounded by the intensive antibiotic therapies that CF patients receive. Airway colonisation by pathogens has undeniable structural consequences on the airway epithelia, however inflammation in the absence of microbial or viral stimuli is also observed in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) from infants with CF [9]. Furthermore, the cumulative effect of neutrophilic inflammation on structural lung damage in children with CF is higher than microbial infection [10], suggesting that identifying and targeting early inflammatory triggers could translate into long-term clinical benefits for CF patients.

Current clinical practice does not prevent permanent damage to the bronchial tree, which is evident in most school-aged children with CF [2]. Thus, a major clinical problem remains in the identification of the processes involved in igniting and maintaining the inflammatory milieu in CF lungs in early life, which eventually lead to bronchiectasis [2]. Several pathobiological factors such as neutrophil reprogramming and the accumulation of insoluble mucus flakes in the lungs have been linked to inflammation and airway remodelling in early life [4, 7, 11]. We have shown that the presence of bile acids (BA) in the BALF of pre-school aged children with CF is associated with early airway inflammation, and is a predictor of structural lung disease progression in both cross-sectional and longitudinal cohorts [12, 13]. Bile acids are intestinal metabolites closely linked to the activity of the gut microbiota [14], which may participate in the progression of CF lung disease by modulating the transmission pathway of the gut-lung axis [15].

To establish if BA indicate early pathological processes in CF lung disease, this study was conducted to profile the inflammatory and microbial landscapes in BALF related to detection of BA. Bronchial wash specimens were collected from 12-month old infants with CF enrolled in the COMBAT-CF study, a placebo-controlled clinical trial with azithromycin [16]. Considering the well-known prokinetic properties of azithromycin [17], we evaluated whether treatment with macrolides affected the odds of detecting BA in BALF. Given the young age of this patient cohort, we explored how different prophylactic antibiotic regimens impacted the BALF microbiota early in life.


Results
Study cohort
BALF specimens (n = 121) were collected from infants (12-month old) with CF enrolled in the COMBAT-CF study. COMBAT-CF was a multicentre randomized placebo-controlled double-blinded study on the efficacy of azithromycin to reduce extent of bronchiectasis at age 3-years (Clinicaltrials.gov: NCT01270074) [16]. Of the eight participating centres, five routinely used anti-Staphylococcus prophylaxis with either flucloxacillin or amoxicillin/clavulanic acid from diagnosis until at least 1 year of age (1 Centre), with most Centres prescribing these until the age of two. Of the 121 patients included in this study (Table S1), four reported short-term macrolide treatment during the first year of life (Table S2). None of these events occurred at the time of bronchoscopy.

Detection of bile acids in BALF correlates with inflammation and clinical outcomes
We detected bile acids (BA) in 49/121 (40%) of the BALF specimens, with a concentration range of 0.003–1.095 µM (median 0.019 µM, IQR = 0.011–0.078 µM) (Table S3). Identification of BA was associated with a higher proportion of infiltrated neutrophils (BA detected: median [IQR] 23.16 [8.08–51.25]; no BA detected: 5.80 [1.67–12.67]; Wilcoxon rank-sum test (WRST) (effect size (r) = 0.43, p = 0.000003)), and elevated levels of IL8 (pg mL-1, BA detected: 405.79 [216.59–786.20]; no BA detected: 139.52 [47.11–524.73]; WRST (r = 0.34, p = 0.0002)) (Fig. 1A-B and Fig. S1). Elevated neutrophil elastase (NE) activity was observed in fewer BALF samples (6/65, 9%) (median [IQR], 0.81 [0.40–1.80] ng mL-1), which also contained BA (Fig. S2). There was an association between NE and BA in BALF (p = 0.003, Fisher’s exact test (FET)).
Patients with BA detected in BALF demonstrated higher percentage of structural lung disease (median [IQR], BA detected: 0.97 [0.32–1.94]; no BA detected: 0.51 [0.12–1.05]; WRST (r = 0.27, p = 0.003)) (Fig. 1C and Fig. S3). Identification of BA in BALF was also associated with more exacerbations during the first year of life (median [IQR], BA detected: 1 [0–3]; no BA detected: 0 [0–2]; WRST (r = 0.27, p = 0.003)), and more courses of oral/inhaled antibiotics (median [IQR], BA detected, 3 [1-5]; no BA detected, 1 [0–3]; WRST (r = 0.31, p = 0.0008)), with longer treatment periods (days treated, median [IQR], BA detected: 13.4 [10–19.5]; no BA detected: 8.5 [0–15.2]; WRST (r = 0.22, p = 0.02)) (Fig. 1D-F and Fig. S3). We did not observe differences in the length of hospital stay in the case of exacerbations, or the number of courses of intravenous antibiotics received during the first year of life (Fig. S3-4).

The microbial landscape of the lower airways in infants with CF
We profiled BALF-associated bacterial and fungal communities using amplicon-sequencing strategies. To monitor DNA contamination by laboratory reagents and clinical instrumentation, we processed and sequenced negative extraction controls and bronchoscope washes alongside the BALF specimens (see Methods section for a comprehensive description). We observed a good correspondence between microorganisms detected by culture and molecular methods (Table S4).

Mean concentrations of microbial DNA were similar between instrument and negative extraction controls, and lower than BALF specimens (Fig. S5 and Table S5). The most abundant operational taxonomic units (OTUs) observed in BALF were assigned to the Stenotrophomonas (mean (standard deviation), 36% (36)) and Streptococcus (22% (18)) taxa (Fig. S6-7). Alpha diversity was positively associated with bacterial burden (Fig. S8A). This relationship was driven by the proportions of oral commensals (Fig. S8C). Pathogen density had negligible effect on microbial diversity, except for a low degree correlation between Shannon diversity and Stenotrophomonas maltophilia load (Fig. S8B,D). Likewise, inflammatory markers were either not correlated or weakly associated with bacterial load and diversity (Fig. S9). Bacterial diversity but not bacterial burden, correlated with the number of exacerbations during the first year of life (1.37 times more exacerbations per unit increase in diversity, 95% Confidence interval, 1.12–1.70, p = 0.003) (Fig. S10A-B). Bacterial load or diversity in BALF were not associated with the proportion of structural lung disease at 12 month of age (Fig. S10C-D).

We obtained ITS2 library amplification from 37/121 (31%) of the BALF DNA extracts. The fungal profiles were dominated by taxa from the Phyla Basidiomycota (mean (standard deviation), 54% (22)) and Ascomycota (44% (20)) (Fig. S11). ITS2 reads were mostly assigned to amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) representing saprophytic yeasts associated with healthy oronasal cavity, human skin, breast milk, or sputum from CF patients (Table S6 and Fig. S11) [19–24]?. Aspergillus and Candida species were observed at markedly lower abundance and prevalence (Table S6 and Fig. S11). We confirmed the presence of genomic material from the commensal Malassezia restricta through qPCR; being at a higher concentration in those DNA extracts yielding ITS2 library amplification (Fig. S12A-B). Malassezia restricta load was not associated with antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of bronchoscopy (Fig. S12C-D). However, we observed a reduction in fungal alpha diversity in BALF from patients treated with beta-lactam and not with macrolide antibiotics (Fig. S13).

To evaluate whether early bacterial communities are related to different clinical outcomes, we performed a community-based clustering using Dirichlet Multinomial Mixtures [25]. Three community types were determined from the 16S rRNA profiles (Fig. 2A-B and Fig. S14). We found Stenotrophomonas and Streptococcus to be the most important drivers defining each ecotype (Fig. S15). Bacterial and Stenotrophomonas maltophilia density, contributed to differences between metacommunities (Fig. S16). Community type three demonstrated a significant reduction in clinical markers of inflammation including IL8 and the proportion of neutrophils in BALF (Fig. 2C-D). None of the microbial ecotypes were associated with a higher degree of lung structural damage (Fig. 2E). Interestingly, different metacommunities were linked to detection of BA in BALF (p = 0.000004, FET), and to penicillin-type antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of BALF collection (p = 0.000000002, FET), but not to azithromycin therapy (p = 0.9, FET) (Fig. S17A-C).
Detection of BA in BALF correlates with distinctive microbial profiles
Given the very young age of this cohort, we explored associations between BA detection and lung microbial profiles. BALF samples containing BA had higher bacterial burden (Log10(16S DNA copies), median [IQR], BA detected: 4.78 [4.23–5.13]; no BA detected: 4.12 [3.78–4.60]; WRST (r = 0.39, p = 0.00003)), and harboured more diverse bacterial communities (Shannon index, BA detected: 2.10 [1.37–2.37]; no BA detected: 1.34 [0.63–2.11]; WRST (r = 0.29, p = 0.002)) (Fig. 3 and Fig. S18). BALF specimens containing BA also demonstrated distinct compositional signatures typically associated with the upper respiratory tract (Fig. 3C). In line with these observations, we observed higher odds of recovering viable microorganisms from clinical microbiology cultures if BALF contained BA (Any density, odds ratio (OR) [95%CI], 2.67 [1.12–6.34], p = 0.03) (Fig. S19). Similar results were observed when we set the cut-off for positive culture to 10,000 colony-forming units (CFU) per mL of BALF (Any microorganism, OR 3.44 [1.55–7.66], p = 0.002). BA were also associated with high cell-density cultures of pathogens (Bacteria and/or Fungi) in BALF (OR 2.33 [1.09–4.96], p = 0.03) (Fig. S19).
Azithromycin therapy does not affect BA detection in BALF
Azithromycin has been demonstrated to facilitate gastric emptying and reduce reflux events [17, 26, 27]. We hypothesised that if azithromycin improves gastroparesis, this therapeutic would be associated with reduced odds of detecting BA in BALF. The probability of detecting BA in BALF was neither increased in the placebo arm (OR 1.41 [0.68–2.94], p = 0.35), nor changed by weight-adjusted azithromycin dose at the time of BALF collection (dose (g), OR 0.14 [0–186.82], p = 0.59) (Fig. 4 and Fig. S20). We obtained similar results after controlling for factors related to the severity of the CF phenotype, including pancreatic insufficiency or homozygosis for the p.F508del mutation (Fig. 4 and Fig. S20).
In our cohort BA detection was more prevalent in patients from Centres who do not use anti-Staphylococcus prophylaxis (Fig. S21A). Patients receiving beta-lactam antibiotic prophylaxis showed a 75% relative reduction in the odds of detecting BA in BALF (OR 0.25 [0.12–0.55], p = 0.0005) (Fig. S21B-C and S22), as well as lower concentration of primary BA in BALF (Fig. S21E-F and S23A-C). Penicillin-based antibiotics are linked to cholestasis, which may explain these results [28]. Patients receiving anti-Staphylococcus prophylaxis demonstrated higher levels of serum cholestasis markers such as gamma glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST), but not alkaline phosphatase (ALP) (Fig. S21G-J and S23D-G). In agreement with an antibiotic class-specific event, the levels of GGT, ALT, AST, ALP, as well as BA remained unaltered across azithromycin and placebo treatment arms (Fig. S24-25).

Azithromycin does not alter the BALF microbiota in early CF
We evaluated how prophylactic antimicrobial therapies affect the composition of the BALF microbiota. Azithromycin was found not to alter bacterial load (median [IQR], azithromycin: 4.38 [4.03–4.93]; placebo: 4.44 [3.82–4.79]; WRST (r = 0.09, p = 0.31)) or diversity (azithromycin: 1.69 [0.93–2.23]; placebo: 1.73 [0.72–2.28]; WRST (r = 0.008, p = 0.93)) (Fig. S26). Similarly, clinical microbiology results were not affected by azithromycin treatment (Fig. S27). Conversely, anti-Staphylococcal prophylaxis at the time of bronchoscopy was associated with a reduction of bacterial biomass in BALF (median [IQR], prophylaxis: 4.14 [3.80–4.53]; no prophylaxis: 4.80 [4.34–5.26]; WRST (r = 0.42, p = 0.000009)) and diversity (prophylaxis: 1.05 [0.57–1.99]; no prophylaxis: 2.23 [1.74–2.46]; WRST (r = 0.56, p = 0.000000004)) (Fig. S28-29). Differential abundance analysis demonstrated that penicillin-type prophylaxis was associated with reduction in the proportions of oropharyngeal taxa (Fig. S30). Furthermore, the odds of retrieving positive cultures from BALF were reduced in patients taking beta-lactam antibiotics (Any culture, OR 0.33 [0.13–0.80], p = 0.01) (Fig. S31). We did not observe an interaction between the effects of azithromycin and anti-Staphylococcal prophylaxis on bacterial burden (F(1,108) = 0.75, p = 0.39) or diversity (F(1,108) = 0.05, p = 0.82) (Fig. S32).


Discussion
In this observational study, we provide evidence supporting that detection of BAs in BALF constitutes an early predictor of both airway inflammation and clinical outcomes in CF. Specifically, we demonstrated neutrophilia and higher airway inflammation in asymptomatic infants with CF who have BAs in BALF. Our data linking BAs to disease burden suggests that profiling BAs in BALF could also help to inform clinicians of patients with worse disease trajectories, as early as at 12 months of age. We also show distinctive patterns of microbial colonisation associated with specific prophylactic antibiotic treatment as well as with detection of BAs in BALF. Thus, our study also unveils factors that should be considered when studying the relationships between the lower airway microbiota and the progression of CF lung disease.

Since the gastrointestinal environment influences the respiratory system via an uncharacterized signalisation pathway namely the gut-lung axis, it can be assumed that respiratory findings in CF patients are modulated by gastrointestinal manifestations [15]. Indeed, detection of the intestinal metabolites BA in BALF have been linked to inflammation and clinical outcomes in both CF and non-CF children [12, 13, 29], and suggest a universal pathological process that is not exclusive to CF. Furthermore, it identifies BA as important modulators in the gut-lung axis. Although determining how BA reach the airways were beyond the scope of this study, recent evidence has shown a link between delayed gastric emptying and high levels of BA in BALF [29]. It was also found that treatment with macrolides did not alter BA levels in BALF [29]. Interestingly, detection of BA in BALF was independent of reflux parameters including number of reflux episodes or type of reflux [29]. Gastrointestinal dysmotility constitutes an understudied medical problem in CF [30], and may provide an underlying mechanism facilitating the translocation of BA into the airways. We did not observe an effect of azithromycin on BA detection in BALF. Since data on gastric motility was not collected, we could not assess whether azithromycin improved gastric emptying, nor evaluate whether detection of BA in BALF was associated with parameters of gastric motility. However, azithromycin is considered an effective prokinetic agent and potent motilin agonist [17, 27]. Patients who were on antibiotic therapies known to cause cholestasis were less likely to have BA in BALF, which implies a complex interaction connecting the gastrointestinal and respiratory systems in CF. Further investigations combining both gastrointestinal and lung testing are therefore required to trace the transmission pathway in the gut-lung axis.

Determining the key processes involved in triggering the lung inflammatory response in early-life CF is a major clinical problem. Through analysis of BALF samples stratified by BA detection, we show that in CF infants, the presence of BA in BALF is strongly associated with markers of airway inflammation. However, our work does not reveal the specific role of BA in the pathophysiology of early CF lung disease, and functional studies are now required. Highlighting the complexity of the CF lung environment, BALF specimens with BA also demonstrated more diverse microbial communities enriched in oropharyngeal taxa, higher bacterial burden, and higher odds of retrieving high-cell-density microbial cultures from BALF. Thus, our findings linking BA to inflammatory markers could be confounded by alterations in the BALF-associated microbiota. While it is true that in our study, metacommunities enriched in oropharyngeal taxa exhibited higher inflammation, the effect was of lower magnitude than for BA. Furthermore, other community descriptors such as diversity or bacterial burden were either weakly associated or not correlated with markers of airway inflammation. Thus, although bacteria and BA could access lower airways via a common physiological process, our data suggest that BA themselves represent a particular pathological alteration linked to the initiation and/or maintenance of airway inflammation. Likewise, our observations support the concept that in the absence of pathogenic infections, the commensals colonising the airways may be necessary, yet insufficient for establishing the inflammatory landscape characteristic of early CF lung disease [4].

Despite the mild lung disease expected in a paediatric cohort, we observed differences in markers of disease progression related to the detection of BA in BALF. These clinical outcomes included medication-related burden, percentage of structural lung disease at the age of one, as well as the number of exacerbations during the first year of life. Elevated markers of airway inflammation provide a plausible physiological defect linking poor clinical outcomes to the presence of BA in BALF. Thus, detection of free NE activity, a precursor of bronchiectasis in CF [3], was more likely in BALF samples containing BA. Furthermore, other inflammatory markers considered predictors of pulmonary exacerbations including IL8 and percentage of neutrophils in BALF [31], were also upregulated in BALF specimens containing BA. We also observed a correlation between bacterial diversity and number of exacerbations. It has been proposed that the airway microbiota could participate in the aetiology of exacerbations by inducing episodic reconfigurations of the lung microbial communities, which subsequently dysregulates host immune responses [32]. Aspiration of oropharyngeal commensals supports this hypothesis, as they have been shown to induce both the transient rearrangement of the lower airway microbiota and a Th17-dependent tuning of host immunity [33]. In our cohort, the increase in community diversity was driven by OTUs typically associated with the oropharynx.

As CF patients age, a relationship between lung function and microbial diversity emerges [6, 8], suggesting that the initial colonisers of the airways could play a protective role. Although antibiotic treatment may confound these observations, it is important to establish whether and how these initial colonisers contribute to the pathophysiology of CF lung disease. Using metacommunity analysis we identified three bacterial community ecotypes associated with contrasting inflammatory outcomes. Interestingly, these ecological assemblies were linked to anti-Staphylococcal antibiotic prophylaxis or the detection of BA in BALF, but not to azithromycin. Metacommunities associated with penicillin-type prophylaxis exhibited a reduction in diversity, bacterial load, and abundance of oropharyngeal taxa, as well as with a progressive reduction in markers of airway inflammation. Ecotypes associated with the detection of BA in BALF showed opposite findings. Microaspiration is ubiquitous in healthy subjects and constitutes a physiological process for seeding the lungs with microorganisms from the upper airways [34]. Broad-spectrum penicillins could therefore have a higher bactericidal effect on these microbial colonisers. Intriguingly, BALF from infants on prophylaxis demonstrated higher proportions of Stenotrophomonas, and the presence of Stenotrophomonas maltophilia DNA was confirmed by species-specific qPCR. In our cohort, only one patient, who also was on penicillin prophylaxis, demonstrated infection by this pathogen by culture. Thus, the high incidence of Stenotrophomonas maltophilia DNA may be explained by transient passing, or by DNA from dead cells. We also found that beta-lactam antibiotics reduced the odds of detecting BA in BALF, likely due to a cholestatic effect. Thus, reduced inflammation in BALF from patients on penicillin prophylaxis could be secondary to keeping the airways relatively sterile and preventing the translocation of BA into the lungs. Also, our observations define early environmental attributes, which may influence colonization patterns and the microbial succession of the CF airways.

The presence of commensals in the airways prior to pathogenic infections remains controversial [4, 6, 35]. Our multicentre study supports the concept that at least in a proportion of infants with CF, complex polymicrobial communities of commensals define not only the bacterial but also the fungal component of the early lung microbiota. This is also supported by detection of non-conventional microorganisms such as Neisseria, Propionibacterium acnes or Corynebacterium in bacterial cultures from BALF (Table S4). Using molecular methods, we found that bacterial burden positively correlated with diversity metrics. The estimated load of oropharyngeal commensals but not traditional CF pathogens drove this relationship. We also observed that broad-spectrum penicillins significantly impacted the load and diversity of non-traditional bacterial taxa, suggesting that at least early in life and contrary to previous observations [35], they do not represent background contaminants. We profiled fungal communities in only ~ 31% of the BALF specimens, likely due to the low fungal biomass in the DNA extracts. As a result of this low sample size, we did not evaluate associations between the resulting mycobiome and clinical outcomes. We did, however, observe a significant drop in fungal diversity in specimens from patients on penicillin-type antibiotics, suggesting that the integrity of the early airway mycobiome may depend on inter-kingdom ecological interactions. As previously reported, we observed a drop in bacterial diversity and airway inflammation associated with anti-Staphylococcal prophylaxis [36]. We also noted that prophylactic administration of broad-spectrum penicillins correlated with a reduction in bacterial burden and lower odds of culturing microorganisms from BALF. Conversely, diversity and bacterial biomass remained unaltered by treatment with azithromycin. This result was also supported by our culture-based clinical data and agrees with prior work in older patients with CF [37]. Basal resistance to macrolides by microorganisms found in BALF could explain these unexpected observations [38] but suggests that benefits associated with azithromycin therapy early in life are independent of its antimicrobial properties.

Our study has several limitations. Firstly, it was impossible to determine whether airway exposure to BA preceded the clinical and microbiological outcomes described in this work. Thus, causal inferences cannot be drawn, and further functional studies are required for this purpose. However, associations between BA in BALF and inflammation have been replicated in non-CF patients, validating observations made here [29]. Secondly, uncertainty due to confounding bias is unavoidable in observational studies. However, we expect that unmeasured confounders associated with inflammation and lung function, were minimised by the multi-centre character of our study and the young age of our patient cohort. We have also been stringent in controlling for type-1 error when performing multiple testing. Importantly, azithromycin treatment was controlled by randomisation, thus minimising uncertainty due to confounding by random distribution of risk factors. Thirdly, BALF was collected using laryngeal masks under general anaesthesia, which does not completely rule out the possibility of salivary contamination. However, the pooled second and third lavages were used for profiling BA and extracting microbial DNA. Thus, if secretions from the upper airways entered the bronchoscope during the procedure, they would have been diluted and/or washed out with the first lavage. Finally, molecular methods do not confirm the viability of the reported BALF microbiota. Although we observed a good correspondence between molecular and culture approaches, clinical culture is biased towards medically relevant species, and most of the taxa we observed are commensals that may require specific growing conditions.


Conclusion
Collectively, our data implies that BA either contribute to or predict early pathomechanisms involved in establishing both the microbial and inflammatory landscapes in CF lungs early in life. Although the use of a potent prokinetic does not reduce BA levels in the lower airways, other strategies to modulate the lung exposure to BA should be explored. Furthermore, the identification of non-invasive biomarkers of BA exposure could provide useful tools to predict infants at greatest risk of progressive lung disease.

