Treatment and outcome of patients suffering from perineal/perianal rhabdomyosarcoma: results from the CWS trials--retrospective clinical study
R
habdomyosarcomas of the perineum and the perianal region
[or perineal/perianal rhabdomyosarcoma (PRMS)] are extremely
rare and occur in less than 2% of all primary cases.1 The 2 main
histological subtypes are embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma and alveolar
rhabdomyosarcoma. Alveolar histology is found more frequently in
PRMS than those at other locations.2
In addition, patients often have
regional lymph node involvement and, at times, distant metastases.2
Tumors are sometimes misdiagnosed as perirectal or gluteal abscess,
delaying early diagnosis and appropriate therapy.3 The prognosis of
patients with PRMS is relatively poor. Patients treated within IRS
I–IV trials had a 5-year overall survival (OS) rate of only 49%.4,5
Positive predictive factors described for a favorable outcome are tumor size of smaller than 5 cm, less advanced clinical group and stage,
negative regional lymph node status, and age less than 10 years.5
Surprisingly, histology has not been described to significantly affect
the outcome.5 To date, there exist no data regarding stool continence
and quality of life (QOL) in children with PRMS after treatment. The
aim of this study was to analyze patients treated within the Cooperative Soft Tissue Sarcoma trials CWS-86, -91, -96, and -2002P of
the Society of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology (GPOH) regarding treatment efficacy, including complications, outcome, positive
predictive factors, incontinence, and QOL.
PATIENTS AND METHODS
Patients
More than 3500 patients with centrally reviewed (IL) histological diagnosis of rhabdomyosarcoma were treated in 32 participating
institutions in Germany and Switzerland and were enrolled on the Cooperative Soft Tissue Sarcoma Studies CWS-86, -91, -96, and -2002P
of the Society of Pediatric Oncology and Hematology (GPOH) between 1986 and 2008. Thirty-five patients with a diagnosis of PRMS
were identified. Three patients were excluded because of an incomplete data set (n = 2) or age more than 21 years at initial diagnosis
(n = 1). The appropriate ethical committee approved the trials. The
patients, guardians or parents, or both gave written informed consent
for participation on the trials.
Study Design
Risk Stratification for Systemic Treatment
All patients received multiagent chemotherapy with at least 3
drugs, including alkylators, dactinomycin, and vincristine, depending on risk stratification and trial. Patients treated within the CWS-86
trial underwent chemotherapy with VAIA (vincristine, ifosfamide,
doxorubicin, dactinomycin).6
In the CWS-91 trial, chemotherapy
was carried out according to the VACA (vincristine, dactinomycin,
doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide) for standard risk group patients or
EVAIA regimen (etoposide, vincristine, dactinomycin, ifosfamide,
doxorubicin) for high-risk patients (all patients with IRS group III
except orbital and non–bladder-prostata genitourinary localization)
In the CWS-96 trial, patients received IVA (ifosfamide, vincristine,
dactinomycin) in the standard risk group. In the high-risk group,
patients were randomized to VAIA (vincristine, ifosfamide, doxorubicin, dactinomycin) or CEVAIE (carboplatin, epirubicin, vincristine, dactinomycin, ifosfamide, etoposide).8
In the CWS-2002P
trial, standard risk group patients were treated with I2VA (ifosfamide,
vincristine, dactinomycin). In the high-risk group, this therapy was
broadened by doxorubicin.
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy was prescribed for the majority of
patients with macroscopic residual tumors after initial biopsy (IRS
group III). In this group, radiographical response was assessed after
9 weeks using computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), as further (local and systemic) treatment was response dependent.
Radiotherapy
The treatment protocol included radiotherapy in children older
than 1 year. Children younger than 3 years should be treated with a
radiation dosage of 32 Gy. Protection of the pelvic/hip growth plates
was recommended to avoid growth disturbances. The target volume
was based on the initial tumor volume on MRI plus a 2-cm margin. The radiation dose was stratified on response to chemotherapy,
IRS group, and histology. Patients with complete response or good
response (definition of response is described later) at radiological
response assessment and favorable (embryonal) histology should undergo hyperfractionated, accelerated radiotherapy (HART) of 32 Gy
to the primary site (1.6 Gy twice daily). Patients with poor response
received a total of 44.8 Gy HART. Patients who did not qualify for
HART (eg, necessity of repeated anesthesia at young age or gut/liver
involvement) received conventional fractionation with 1.8 Gy per day
(overall dose: 39.8 or 50 Gy). Lower dose was used for irradiation
of the abdomen or if a dose reduction was necessary (age or tumor
localization). For a better comparison between the groups, patients
were assigned to a group (=36 Gy and >36 Gy).
Surgery
Surgical guidelines did not recommend a primary tumor resection unless a primary complete tumor resection without microscopic
residual disease seemed to be feasible. In all other cases, a primary
biopsy (open or tru-cut) should be carried out to establish a histological diagnosis. Secondary surgery after chemotherapy and/or
radiotherapy was carried out if a residual tumor mass was detected
at the time of response assessment. Mutilating surgery (resection of
the rectum, exenteration of the pelvis) was allowed after neoadjuvant
therapy. The extent of tumor resection was defined in the following
way: R0 = complete tumor resection without microscopic residual
disease; R1 = tumor resection with microscopic residual disease; and
R2 = tumor resection with macroscopic residual disease.
Definition of Treatment Groups and Response to
Preoperative Chemotherapy
Patients were evaluated regarding local treatment. Therefore,
patients were assigned to 4 different local treatment groups. In group
1, patients were treated with chemotherapy and surgery alone. In
group 2, patients were treated with chemotherapy and radiotherapy.
In group 3, patients were treated with chemotherapy, radiotherapy,
and tumor resection (radiotherapy plus surgery). In group 4, patients
received only chemotherapy. Patients were additionally subgrouped
according to tumor size (=5 or >5 cm), patients’ age (<10 or =10
years), locoregional lymph node status (negative or positive), and the
IRS group.
Complete response was assumed if there was a lack of visible
tumor on CT/MRI or no evidence for viable tumor during second-look
surgery. Good response was defined as a tumor volume reduction of
more than two-thirds. Poor response was a tumor volume reduction
between one-third and two-thirds. Objective response was presumed
if the reduction was less than one-third and more than the baseline.
Progressive disease described any tumor progression.
Assessment of Postoperative Bowel and
Bladder Function
To assess the postoperative bowel and bladder function of
the treated patients and for the acquisition of possible radiotherapyrelated restrictions of the pelvic mobility, a questionnaire was sent to
surviving patients by mail. The questionnaire inquired about the quality, quantity, frequency, and problems of bowel movements. Second,
subjective stool incontinence and symptoms of constipation were analyzed. In addition, the voiding behavior and problems with walking
were evaluated. Fecal incontinence was also graded using the Wexner
fecal incontinence score, with a possible range from 0 to 20.9
QOL Assessment
QOL assessment was carried out using an established gastrointestinal QOL questionnaire, which was initially described by
Eypasch and colleagues.10 This validated questionnaire assesses 36
items concerning physical, functional, mental, and social status. For
each question, there are 5 possible answers, assigned a numeric value
from 0 (lowest score) to 4 (highest score).10,11 The maximum score
is 144 and the lowest score is 0. A high score correlates with a high
QOL. The QOL questionnaire was also sent by mail to all surviving
patients.
Statistical Analysis
The 5-year OS and the 5-year event-free survival (EFS) were
calculated by Kaplan-Meier estimates. For the OS, the time from
primary diagnosis to death (therapy related or other reasons) or last
follow-up (censored observations) was used. For the EFS, the endpoint was defined as the time from diagnosis to first relapse. KaplanMeier estimates are given with log–log-transformed 95% confidence
intervals (CIs).12 The Mantel-Cox log rank test was used to test the
difference between survival curves. Cox proportional hazards analysis was performed to calculate single variable and adjusted risk ratios,
with 95% CIs for risk factors. Demographic data are reported as median (interquartile range). A P value less than 0.05 was considered
significant. The statistical analyses were performed using the IBM
SPSS 20 software.
RESULTS
Patients
The characteristics of the 32 evaluated patients are shown in
Table 1. Response evaluation in IRS group III was not possible for 1
patient, in whom the tumor volume was not measured, as the suggested
imaging was not carried out at the correct time point. In IRS group
IV, response could not be assessed for 2 patients for the same reasons.
The 5-year EFS for different IRS groups are shown in Figure 1.
Radiotherapy
Twenty-three of 32 patients underwent radiotherapy. The
different local treatment groups are shown in Table 2. Patients
underwent either radiotherapy alone or radiotherapy followed by
tumor resection. An incomplete tumor resection without preoperative
radiotherapy was not recommended by the study protocols. Radiation
doses ranged from 32 to 64 Gy. Doses 36 Gy or less were used for 7
patients (HART: 5; conventional fractionation: 1; brachytherapy: 1).
Doses more than 36 Gy were used for 16 patients (HART: 13;
conventional: 3). There was no significant difference regarding the 5-year EFS rate between patients who were irradiated with a dose
of 36 Gy or less (33.3%) compared with patients who underwent
radiotherapy with a dose of more than 36 Gy (52.2%; P = 0.62),
given that the irradiation dose was risk adapted (Fig. 2). Eight of
11 patients treated only with radiotherapy had locoregional lymph
node involvement, and 4 of 11 patients were in IRS group IV. Early
complications of radiotherapy, including dermatitis, leucopenia,
epidermiolysis, diarrhea, proctitis, and cystitis, were reported in 57%
of the patients (13/23). Late effects of radiotherapy, including growth
retardation of the pelvis, urinary incontinence, low compliance of
the bladder, and stricture of the urethra, were observed in 3 patients.
Surgery
Primary Surgery
Twenty-four patients underwent initial tumor biopsy (open
biopsy: n = 20; needle biopsy: n = 2; perineal punch biopsy:
n = 1; MRI-guided biopsy: n = 1). Regional lymph node sampling
was done in 8 of these patients, all of which showed tumor-positive
results. Eight patients were treated with primary tumor resection (resection status R0: n = 2; R1: n = 5; R2: n = 1). Regional lymph node
sampling was carried out in 1 patient undergoing primary tumor resection without detection of tumor cells. Minor surgical complications
(wound healing disorders) occurred in 3 patients after biopsy and in
1 patient after tumor resection. There was no difference with respect
to primary biopsy or tumor resection regarding complications.
Secondary Surgery
One patient underwent secondary tumor biopsy, in which no
tumor cells could be detected. Twelve patients were treated with
secondary tumor resection (resection status R0: n = 2; R1: n = 3;
R2: n = 4; not assessable: n = 3). Additional regional lymph node
sampling was carried out for 3 patients, of which 1 showed tumornegative findings and 2 were not assessable after chemotherapy. Minor
surgical complications occurred in 2 patients, who developed woundhealing disorders. The complete overview and outcome of different
treatment groups are shown in Table 2.
Positive Predictive Factors for Outcome
On the basis of the predescribed positive predictive factors
of Blakely and colleagues,5 we investigated whether these positive
predictive factors could also be identified in our cohort. Positive
predictive factors for outcome in our group were patients’ age of
less than 10 years, tumor size 5 cm or smaller, negative locoregional
lymph node involvement, low IRS group, and embryonal histology
(Tables 3, 4).
Overall Survival
The 5-year OS and EFS rate for the whole group was 47%
(95% CI: 29–64).
Assessment of Postoperative Bowel and
Bladder Function
The questionnaires were answered and sent back by only 5 of
15 surviving patients despite forwarding 2 additional reminders to
the participating centers. The oldest patient alive is currently 34 years
of age, so many of the patients may have left the pediatric aftercare.
All patients answering the questionnaire underwent radiotherapy. For
4 patients, radiotherapy was combined with surgical tumor resection. All patients reported neither voiding problems nor limitations
in pelvic motility as an indicator for impairments after radiotherapy.
Three of 5 patients reported defecation problems and symptoms of fecal incontinence while having pasty stools. Four patients were able to
discriminate between air, pasty, and solid stool. Three patients had a stool frequency of more than 2 and fewer than 6 per day. Two patients
had a stool frequency of only 1 to 2 per day. Two patients constantly
had to wear diapers. The median Wexner fecal incontinence score
was 9 (min: 6; max: 16) (0 = no stool incontinence; 20 = complete
stool incontinence).
QOL Assessment
Four of 5 patients responding to the QOL questionnaire completed the questionnaire entirely. The median QOL score was 90.5 (min: 74; max: 106) [lowest possible score 0 (no QOL), highest score
144 (good QOL)].
DISCUSSION
PRMS is rare and only a very limited number of patients have
been described.2,5,13 The largest published series by Blakely and
colleagues5 described several risk factors for a favorable outcome,
including a primary tumor size of smaller than 5 cm, less advanced
clinical group and stage, negative regional lymph node status, and
age less than 10 years. The histological subtype did not significantly affect the outcome in their trial.5
In PRMS, alveolar histology is more
often found than those in other locations and has been shown to be
accompanied by a less favorable prognosis.2
In IRS I–IV, 65% of
the patients had alveolar or undifferentiated histology.5
In our study,
75% of the patients had alveolar histology. In contrast to the IRS
results, the histological subtype significantly affected the outcome
of our patients. The 5-year EFS rate was 39.1% in patients with
alveolar histology compared with 87.5% in patients with embryonal
tumors (P = 0.013). The detailed analysis of our smaller study cohort
showed some well-defined differences in comparison with the IRS
I–IV trials. In our series, patients with embryonal histology had less
regional lymph node involvement, were mostly younger than 10 years,
had no metastases, were often in lower IRS groups, and had only
2 local relapses. In contrast, patients with alveolar histology often
had locoregional lymph node involvement, were mostly older than
10 years, had more distant metastases, were mostly in higher IRS
groups, and had an increased number of local relapses. Therefore these factors may account for the significant difference between the
2 histological subgroups.
Another risk factor was the primary tumor size. Most of our
patients had a tumor size of larger than 5 cm and had a higher clinical
stage. This observation was also made by Blakely and colleagues.5
The reason might be that older children tend to hide their intimate
areas from their parents and therefore lesions are diagnosed later. The
outcome of children with a tumor size of smaller than 5 cm was much
better (5-year EFS rate: 81.8%) than those with a tumor size of larger
than 5 cm (35%; P = 0.027).
In IRS I–IV trials, 64% of the patients presented with advanced stage tumors (IRS III/IV).5
In our study, 81% of the patients
had advanced stage disease. We found a statistically significant difference between IRS group I–III patients and IRS group IV patients.
Therefore, metastatic disease is a negative prognostic factor in our
series.Locoregional lymph node involvement is often found in patients with PRMS and is reported to be highest among all sites in
rhabdomyosarcoma.2,14 In the complete IRS I–IV trials, 46% of the
patients had proven locoregional lymph node involvement.5
In our
series, 50% of the patients had positive lymph nodes and they had a
statistically significant worse outcome. Seven of 16 patients were in
IRS group IV. Therefore, the evaluation of locoregional lymph nodes
needs to be continued in future CWS trials. Blakely and colleagues
reported that positive lymph nodes are underestimated by CT and
suggested surgical evaluation of regional lymph nodes.5
In the CWS
trials, MRI scans were used for the evaluation of lymph nodes, which
offered a better soft-tissue contrast. Positron emission tomography
(PET) and PET/CT seem to be even more beneficial in the diagnosis
of lymph node lesions in rhabdomyosarcoma,15,16 but the final role of
PET/CT in rhabdomyosarcoma is unclear. This should be taken into
account during diagnostic workup, as further intensified therapy including radiotherapy might be required for the management of these
lymph nodes.5
Another important point is the age of the patients. Patients
younger than 10 years have a better outcome than older patients,5
which could also be confirmed in our series. This might be caused
by the fact that patients younger than 10 years more often present
with embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma than older patients. In addition,
15 of 17 patients 10 years or older had a tumor size of larger than
5 cm. A possible explanation might be that tumors in young children
are diagnosed earlier because they are more often inspected by their
parents.
Taken together, we could confirm Blakely and colleagues’ positive predictive factors for survival, including primary tumor size of
smaller than 5 cm, low clinical group/no IRS group IV disease, negative locoregional lymph node involvement, and age less than 10 years.
In addition, we found that embryonal histology is a prognostic factor
for survival.
The optimal treatment modality for patients with PRMS is unclear. Within the CWS trials, patients were stratified for local control
on the basis of several criteria such as assessment of resectability and
tumor size and location. The principle of the CWS trials was that all
patients should receive radiotherapy before surgery except if there was
a contraindication for radiotherapy (eg, age <1 year, field) or if a nonmutilating R0 resection was feasible. Patients received treatment in 4
groups. The best outcome regarding the 5-year EFS was found among
the 7 patients undergoing surgical tumor resection and chemotherapy
(85.7%). These results are better than among patients treated with
radiochemotherapy and tumor resection (5-year EFS: 63.6%), but it
must be taken into account that 3 of 7 patients had embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma and that only 1 of 7 patients had locoregional lymph
node involvement, resulting in a better outcome. The question whether
primary or secondary surgery is more beneficial for the outcome cannot be answered because of the small size of the cohort. Only 3 of
7 patients had a microscopically complete tumor resection, yet only
one patient had a local relapse. Interestingly, these patients underwent
primary microscopic complete tumor resection. Most of the patients
treated with combined radiochemotherapy and tumor resections had
alveolar histology and were the more challenging tumors for local
control. Five of 12 patients had locoregional lymph node involvement. A microscopic complete tumor resection was achieved in only
one patient. Four patients in this group had a local relapse, of which
only one patient underwent R0 resection. The necessity of a complete
tumor resection in this location after radiochemotherapy remains unclear. Although reexcisions of primary lesions after primary surgery
are recommended to achieve clinical group I,5
the indication for microscopic complete mutilating secondary surgery remains—based on
our data—unclear. Patients treated with radiochemotherapy alone had
a significantly worse outcome compared with patients treated with chemotherapy and surgery or with radiochemotherapy and surgery,
taking into account that 8 of 11 patients had locoregional lymph node
involvement and 4 of 11 patients had local relapse. Therefore, radiation therapy was used for patients with tumors, which were judged as
inoperable, and obviously the outcome was worse in these patients.
The use of risk-adapted radiation therapy doses seemed to be reasonable in our cohort, but one must interpret these findings cautiously
because an evaluation of different radiation dose levels in the singlerisk groups has not been possible. An analysis of larger numbers will
be required to finally answer this question. Chemotherapy alone is
not an alternative for these patients; in our studies, it was used for
rapidly progressing patients who could not undergo local control.
The assessment of postoperative bowel and bladder function
was limited in our series. The reason for the low survey response rate
remains unclear, but it might be due to the long period of observation
and the challenges in locating patients. Nevertheless, 3 of 5 patients
had fecal incontinence, which correlated with an increased Wexner
fecal incontinence score. Therefore, improvements of local control
including evaluation of proton beam therapy and brachytherapy might
be studied in future CWS trials regarding treatment efficacy and side
effects. QOL assessment revealed a low median QOL score of 90.5
in comparison with patients undergoing surgery for other colorectal
tumors. Patients undergoing sigmoid colectomy for carcinomas had a
median QOL score of 106 of 113 depending on the surgical approach
performed.11 In our series, fecal incontinence seems to be the most
serious problem for the patients, resulting in a lower QOL score.
CONCLUSIONS
Patients with PRMS are a high-risk population with a higher
proportion of alveolar histology and locoregional lymph node involvement than at other sites. Surgical evaluation of lymph nodes,
followed by appropriate therapy, was carried out in the CWS trials in
the past and was found to be appropriate. Novel diagnostic imaging
tools such as PET/CT or PET/MRI may be useful for evaluation of
suspicious lymph nodes and might replace the need for surgical evaluation but has yet to be defined. Several predictive risk factors for a
more favorable prognosis could be identified. Besides systemic control by chemotherapy, local control should consist of surgical tumor
resection or a combination of radiotherapy and surgery. Radiotherapy
as the sole local therapy seems not to be adequate. In addition to oncological issues, fecal incontinence and QOL seem to be a problem
of these patients and should be taken into account during treatment
planning. Our preliminary QOL results underline that possible late
effects should be taken into account in future treatment concepts.
