Durable functional limitation in patients with coronavirus disease-2019 admitted to intensive care and the effect of intermediate-dose vs standard-dose anticoagulation on functional outcomes
1. Introduction
Coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19) has post-acute manifestations that may impact the everyday life functional and the mental health status of the affected patients [1]. In a cross-sectional global online survey on 735 COVID-19 survivors, 79.5% and 56.2% of the responders reported problems with their routine activities and mobility within 3 months after the diagnosis [2]. Similarly, in another online survey, only 5.3% of the participants reported to be symptom-free in 6-month follow up [3]. Tools such as the Post-COVID-19 Functional Status (PCFS) scale have been developed and validated to assess the chronic impact of COVID-19 on functional limitations [4], [5]. COVID-19 can also cause depressive symptoms in recovered patients, which can impact the daily function and the return to normal activities [6]. In a survey of 3904 participants with various stages of prior COVID-19 severity, half had depressive symptoms during mean duration of 4 months post-infection [7].

Patients with COVID-19 who require ICU level of care may be at a particularly high risk for functional limitation and depression, although the severity is unknown [6], [8]. It is possible that microvascular or macrovascular thrombosis and the associated thrombo-inflammation, common in the setting of COVID-19 [9], [10], [11], [12], contribute to functional limitations among COVID-19 post-ICU survivors. This gap in knowledge is reflected by a lack of specific recommendations for physical and mental rehabilitation after the acute course of COVID-19.

The Intermediate versus Standard-dose Prophylactic anticoagulation In cRitically-ill pATIents with COVID-19: An opeN label randomized controlled trial (INSPIRATION) trial was a multicenter randomized trial that compared the efficacy and safety of intermediate-dose versus standard-dose prophylactic anticoagulation in patients with COVID-19 admitted to the ICU ([13], [14], [15]). Among the pre-specified goals of INSPIRATION were to evaluate the functional limitation (assessed by PCFS) and depressive symptoms (assessed by Patient Health Questionnaire-2 (PHQ-2) in the study participants. For the functional status study, since a direct treatment effect of short-term anticoagulation on 90-day functional and mood outcomes were believed to be unlikely, it was specified a priori to pool the study groups for the assessment of the changes in functional status and depressive symptoms between 30-day and 90-day follow-up, after excluding a significant beneficial or harmful treatment effect. This manuscript summarizes the results of the functional status study and reports the exploratory effect of treatment assignment on functional status and depressive symptoms.


2. Methods
2.1. Study design
INSPIRATION was a randomized clinical trial of patients with COVID-19 admitted to ICU. Patients were randomized to intermediate-dose vs standard-dose prophylactic anticoagulation. The present study assessed the interval change in functional impairment and depressive symptoms between the first and the third month of randomization, and assessed the potential treatment effect of assigned anticoagulation regimens on functional outcomes and depressive symptoms [14]. The trial was conducted in 10 academic centers in two cities of Tabriz and Tehran, Iran.

2.2. Patients
Briefly, patients with polymerase-chain-reaction confirmed COVID-19 admitted to the ICU within 7 days from the index hospitalization and life expectancy >24 h were considered for inclusion. Main exclusion criteria consisted of an established indication for therapeutic anticoagulation and overt bleeding. The assigned treatments were continued until 30 days from randomization or death or a thrombotic or hemorrhagic event, irrespective of hospital stay status [14]. Enoxaparin, was the primary anticoagulant agent in the present study. Patients assigned to intermediate-dose prophylactic anticoagulation received enoxaparin, 1 mg/kg daily. In the control group, enoxaparin 40 mg daily was the standard-dose prophylactic anticoagulation regimen. Predefined modifications according to body weight and creatinine clearance were applied. Unfractionated heparin was used for patients with severe renal insufficiency [14], [15] .Patient recruitment for INSPIRATION trial started from July 29, 2020.

Inclusion of the PCFS and PHQ-2 data in INSPIRATION was started 1 month after the initiation of the trial (August 28, 2020). All patients who were enrolled between August 28, 2020 and November 19, 2020 (i.e., the date of completion of enrollment for INSPIRATION) and agreed to participate in the 30- and 90-days telephone-based follow ups, were included in the present study (Fig. 1 ). For depressed mood screening, only patients who survived up to 30-day and 90-day follow up were included, since the survey needs to be completed by patients.
2.3. Functional and mental health assessment
Functional status was assessed by PCFS. Briefly, PCFS is an ordinal outcome scale and is used for grading patients from 0 (no functional limitations) to 4 (severe functional limitations) and 5 (death) (e-Fig. 1) [4], [5].The construct validity of the original version was proved in 1939 subjects 3-month after symptoms onset [5]. PCFS scale was selected for the present study since it has been designed for the assessment of long-term outcomes. This is distinct from other important scales that focus on short-term or in-hospital outcomes (such as the World Health Organization Ordinal Scale for Clinical Improvement) [5]. For the current study, we discussed the process of preparing a Farsi translation for the PCFS tool with the developers of this tool (FAK and BS). PCFS was first translated into Farsi (primary language in the study sites). Subsequently, it was back translated into English. The initial Farsi version was drafted by PS, BB (both cardiologists) and HB (clinical epidemiologist). All these authors are proficient in both English and Farsi. This version was back-translated, independently, to English by a cardiologist (AA), again proficient to both languages who was unaware of the primary English version, to ascertain fidelity to the original English version. Minor revisions were made in this process to ascertain preserving the content while attuning to language-specific intricacies. Following consensus-based revisions, the Farsi translation was sent to six clinicians (three cardiologists, one cardiac surgeon, one pediatrician and one social medicine specialist) who had contracted COVID-19 in the past, for pilot assessment and feedback and to one non-physician with expertise in Farsi and English literature. All participants found the questions to be easily understandable and noted an acceptable agreement between the original English version and the Farsi translation. The final Farsi version was reviewed for fluency by PS and BB. Finally, the same graphical design of the original English version was applied to the Faris version. This version, a user's manual, as well as >25 other translations and cultural adaptations can be found at: https://osf.io/qgpdv/ (CC-BY license).

The PHQ-2 questionnaire is a validated tool for screening depressive symptoms, which has been previously validated in Farsi [16] and is commonly used in COVID-19 [17]. PHQ-2 is scored from 0 to 6, with higher odds of major depressive disorder with a score = 3 [18].

2.4. Study outcomes
The assessment of functional status and depressive symptoms between the two assigned anticoagulation regimens was set as a pre-specified exploratory outcome during the design of INSPIRATION trial. Also, the interval change in functional limitation and depressive symptoms between 30-day and 90-day post-randomization periods were assessed in the pooled cohort of patients. As explained before, patients with PCFS Grade 0, 1–2 and PCFS 3–4 were defined as no, minimal to mild, and moderate to severe functional limitation, respectively. Death before each interval was classified as PCFS Garde 5. In addition, patients screened with PHQ-2 = 3, have higher odds of depressive symptoms. For 30-day and 90-day assessment of functional outcomes and depression screening, the day of randomization (while the patients were still in the ICU) was considered as day 1.

2.5. Statistical analysis
Data were described as median (interquartile range) for interval variables and frequency (percentage) for categorical variables.

As described previously, it was pre-specified to exclude a treatment effect for short-term intermediate-dose versus standard-dose prophylactic anticoagulation with respect to the 90-day functional and mood outcomes and to proceed with analyses for interval changes in functional and mood outcomes, from 30-day to 90-day follow-up in the pooled cohort. The treatment effects were subsequently analyzed in detail in exploratory analyses.

For comparisons of 90-day functional status and depressive symptoms between patients assigned to intermediate-dose and standard-dose prophylactic anticoagulation, a Mann Whitney U test was used for PCFS, followed by a mixed effects ordinal logistic regression model with random intercepts for centers resulting in odds ratios (ORs) and corresponding confidence interval (CIs). These ORs show the odds of ending up in a higher PCFS category under treatment. For comparison of PHQ-2 at 90-day follow-up between the anticoagulation strategies, a Pearson's chi square test (for PHQ-2 = 3) was performed, followed by mixed effects logistic regression model with random intercept for centers.

Comparison of the changes in functional status and depressive symptoms (i.e., the proportion of patients with PCSF grade 3-or-4 and PHQ-2 = 3, respectively) between the first and third months after the enrollment were performed with McNemar's test. Of note, patients who were enrolled after August 28, 2020 and died before completion of 30-day follow up were classified as PCFS grade 5 (death) and consequently included in the functional status analysis in order to prevent survival bias. In contrast, as stated earlier, for completion of PHQ-2, direct patient participation was required. Therefore, this analysis was performed in patients who survived to 90-day follow-up. Of note, only 4 patients died between days 31 and 90, thereby having little impact on the cohort being studied. A two-sided P-value < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant. No adjustment for multiplicity of comparison was pre-specified. Stata for MacOS (Stata Corp. 2013. Stata Statistical Software: Release 13. College Station, TX) was used for statistical analysis.


3. Results
Of 600 randomized patients, 478 were enrolled after initiation of the functional status study and were eligible for 90-day functional status analysis. Overall, 103 patients did not agree to participate. Therefore, 375 patients (median age, 62 years; 42% women) are included in the present analysis (Fig. 1). Baseline characteristics are summarized in Table 1 . Considering the lack of the treatment effect between the two trial arms (P = 0.80 for PCFS and P = 0.14 for PHQ-2), the changes in functional status and depressive symptoms between 30-day and 90-day follow up are reported in the pooled cohort.
Of patients included in the study, 191/375 (50.9%) died during the 30-day follow-up (PCFS grade 5) and 168/375 (44.8%) patients reported any functional limitation (PCFS grade 1–4), including 75/375 (20.0%) who reported grade 3-or-4 limitation. Only 16/375 (4.2%) surviving patients did not report any functional limitations at 30-day follow-up. By 90-day follow up, a total of 195/375 (52.0%) patients died (four new deaths between days 31–90, all among patients with a 30-day PCFS grade 4) and 122/375 (32.5%) suffered from functional limitation (PCFS grades 1–4), of whom 18/375 (4.8%) had 90-day PCFS grade 3-or-4 limitations. Therefore, there was a decrease in the proportion of patients with PCSF grades 3-or-4 between the 30-day and 90-day follow ups (20.0% versus 4.8%, P<0.001). The PCFS changes between the two-time points is depicted in Fig. 2 A. In addition, the proportion of patients with no functional limitations (PCFS grade 0) was improved from 16/375 (4.2%) to 58/375 (15.4%) (P<0.001).
A post-hoc multivariable analysis among 165 patients who survived to hospital discharged showed that only prolonged stay in the ICU (>7 days) was associated with increased odds of severe functional limitation (PCFS Grade =3). Also, among 180 patients who completed both the 30-day and 90-day PHQ-2 questionnaires, female sex was associated with a higher odds of depressive symptoms (PHQ-2 = 3) at three-month. Our post-hoc multivariable analysis among 168 patients with at least minimum of functional limitation (PCFS Grade 1–4) at 30-day, showed that younger age at the time of enrollment was a predictor of functional limitation recovery at 90-day. Also, the post-hoc multivariable analysis among 47 patients with high odds of depressive symptoms (PHQ-2 = 3) at the first-month, was unable to find any predictors for depressive symptoms improvement at third-month evaluation (Supplement).

The median PHQ-2 total score was 2 (IQR, 0–3) at 30-day follow-up. It declined to 0 (IQR, 0–2) at 90-day follow-up (P<0.001). The proportion of patients with PHQ-2 = 3, decreased from 47/180 (26.1%) patients at 30-day to 30/180 (16.6%) patients at 90-day follow up (P = 0.05) (Fig. 2B).

The treatment effect for intermediate-dose versus standard-dose prophylactic anticoagulation was evaluated at the 90-day follow up; a total of 187 and 188 patients were assigned in the intermediate-dose and standard-dose anticoagulation regimens, respectively, of whom 98 (intermediate-dose group) and 97 (standard-dose group) patients died (i.e., PCFS grade 5). PCFS grading did not show a difference between the two anticoagulation regimens, at 90-day follow-up, with a median PCFS grade of 0–3 (IQR,1–5) in both groups (P = 0.90) (Fig. 3 A). In addition, the proportion of patients with PCSF grade 3-or-4 was not different between the two study groups (10/187 (5.3%) versus 8/188 (4.2%); ORbinary, 1.20, [95% CI, 0.46 to 3.11], P = 0.80). In the mixed effects ordinal regression model with random intercept for centers, there was no association between the assigned anticoagulation regimen and PCFS grading at 90-day follow-up (ORordinal, 1.07, [95% CI, 0.75 to 1.53], P = 0.68).
Assessment of the treatment effect on depressive symptoms in the two study groups indicted that the proportion of patients with 90-day PHQ-2 score = 3 was not different in those assigned to intermediate-dose versus standard-dose prophylactic anticoagulation (16/89 [17.9%] versus 14 /91 [15.3%]; ORbinary, 1.14, [95% CI, 0.79 to 1.65], P = 0.14) (Fig. 3B). In the mixed effect logistic regression model with random intercept for centers, there was no significant association between the assigned anticoagulant regimen and PHQ-2 = 3 at 90-day follow-up (ORbinary, 0.74, 95% CI: 0.36 to 1.53, P = 0.42).


4. Discussion
In this analysis from the INSPIRATION trial, we noted that fewer than half of the patients with COVID-19 admitted to the ICU died by 30-day follow-up and one in five of the survivors had severe functional limitations (PCFS grade 3-or-4) at 30-day follow up. In addition, nearly 5% had persistent severe functional limitation by 90-day follow-up. Only a small but increasing minority became completely free from functional limitations during follow-up. The severity of depressive symptoms decreased over the 3-month study period. However, one sixth of the patients had a positive depression screen at the 90-day follow up, suggesting a high probability of major depression. Importantly, intermediate-dose versus standard-dose prophylactic anticoagulation did not impact the functional limitations. These results, along with findings from other analyses from short-term clinical outcomes [15,19,20], do not support the use of intermediate-dose prophylactic anticoagulation in patients with COVID-19 admitted to the ICU.

SARS-CoV-2 entrance into endothelial cells of brain vasculature through angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptors can lead to inflammation, thrombin production, promoting microthrombi deposition. Furthermore, systemic inflammation results in decreased monoamines and trophic factors and activation of microglia, leading to an increase in the glutamate, N-methyl-d-aspartate and excitotoxicity. These changes can cause new-onset or exacerbation of preexisting neuropsychiatric problems including depression and functional limitation [21], [22]. This study complements the findings about functional recovery in COVID-19 from prior investigations. A large national survey on 508,707 participants in the community in England, reported a weighted prevalence of chronic symptoms of 5.75% (5.68, 5.81) for one and 2.22% (2.1, 2.26) for three or more symptoms [23]. In nearly one-third of participants with at least one persistent symptom, the post-COVID manifestations have severely impaired their daily life. Taboada et al. in a prospective observational study of 91 patients with COVID-19 discharged from ICU, reported a 63% decrease in quality of life (assessed by EuroQol Group Association five-domain, three-level questionnaire) at 6-month follow up, compared to pre-COVID-19 involvement [24]. To our knowledge, no studies evaluating the post-COVID-19 functional limitation based on PCFS in critically-ill population have been published, yet.

Although PCFS captures some elements about anxiety and depression, in this study we opted for ad-hoc data collection on depression screening using PHQ-2, as well. In a recent study of 73 mechanically-ventilated patients due to severe respiratory failure with COVID-19, Olanipekun et al. reported that 44% of survivors screened positive for a probable major depression disorder at 90-day follow up based on PHQ-2 questionnaire. We have reported a lower incidence of patients with high likelihood of severe depression in this study (16.6%). These differences should be assessed as additional evidence accrues from ongoing studies [15].

Limited evidence exists about potential predictors for persistent functional limitation and depressive symptoms and factors leading to their improvement. Our post-hoc analysis showed that prolonged ICU stay (>7 days) was associated with increased odds for severe functional limitation at three-month follow up and, and younger age as a predictor of improvement in functional status over time. Also, female sex was associated with higher odds of depressive symptoms at three-month evaluation, although no statistically meaningful predictors were found for depressive symptoms improvement over time. It should be considered, however, that our analyses were post-hoc and not powered for the above purposes. Other studies, albeit small, have suggested advanced age, male sex, need for mechanical ventilation, duration of mechanical ventilation and length of ICU stay as potential predictors for persistent impaired quality of life in patients with COVID-19 [24] . Of note, pre-COVID-19 experience showed weak correlations between quality of care during ICU stay and quality of life impairment in ARDS survivors [25].

This study has several strengths. PCFS and PHQ-2 questionnaires were completed prospectively and through structured telephone interview on a considerable sample of consecutively enrolled patients, which minimize the recall bias compared with online surveys. Both questionnaires were evaluated in 2 time intervals, which allowed for the assessment of the change in functional and depressive symptoms over time. Finally, being built on the background of a randomized trial, we had the opportunity to evaluate the effect of escalated-dose versus standard-dose anticoagulation on functional status measures.


5. Limitations
The study has several limitations. First, 103 patients did not agree to participate in the present survey. Their objection might relate to their limited functional status, mental health or cognitive status, and might influence the final results [26]. However, the baseline characteristics between the participating (375 patients) and non-participating (103 patients) population were balanced, which decreases the risk of selection bias (e-Table 1). It is not feasible to engage patients without consent in prospective research studies. Future large-scale routine care studies based on electronic records, with appropriate institutional review board approval, can share complementary information about the external validity of our findings. Second, many of the study participants were enrolled during the earlier months of the pandemic. As effective therapies and experience of health systems for management of COVID-19 lead into lower mortality rates over time, it is possible that a larger proportion of survivors experience some form of durable functional impairment. Third, the pre-COVID-19 functional and mood status in the INSPIRATION participants was unknown and therefore comparison with pre-COVID-19 levels is not possible. Some inferences can be made from general data from Iran, which indicate that 0.3% and 2.1% of the general population complained about the severe functional limitation and severe anxiety/depressed mood, respectively [27]. Finally, since follow up interviews were telephonic, application of more detailed questionnaires such as PHQ-9 for confirmation of major depression were not feasible and warrant attention in future studies.

In conclusion, disturbed functional status is a common feature at 30-day follow-up after ICU admission with COVID-19, with a minority having severe persistent functional limitations even at 3-month follow-up. Severity of depressive symptoms among survivors decreased over time. However, a considerable number of patients expressed depressive symptoms even at 3-month follow-up. Intermediate-dose compared with standard-dose prophylactic anticoagulation did not impact the 3-month functional status or depressive symptoms. Larger studies are needed to understand the predictors of functional and mental impairment. Identification of valid predictors would help the design of RCTs which intended to test different therapeutic strategies (from non-pharmacological interventions such as rehabilitation program or building resilience and coping behaviors to pharmacotherapy) for quality-of-life and mental health improvement of patients with COVID-19 after hospital discharge. Considering the current knowledge gap, individualized approach should be ponder based on available resources and patients’ compliance