Introduction
Ageing populations and future shortages of health-care professionals encourage the early recognition and treatment of emerging diseases to prevent hospitalisation and to maintain independent living for community-dwelling older adults (aged 65 years or older).1 Hospitalisation can be lifesaving for older adults but is also an economic burden to society and is associated with adverse health outcomes, leading to an increased need for home-based-care services.2,  3
The recognition of emerging acute disease in older adults can be challenging, owing to atypical symptoms, age-related physiological changes, and symptoms of competing chronic diseases.4
Digital algorithms and prediction models of emerging acute disease can help to overcome these challenges. Multiple approaches can support home-based-care nurses in caring for community-dwelling older adults, for example, algorithm-based clinical decision making, automated documentation, and prediction models that detect negative health outcomes.5,  6,  7 However, little is known about the effectiveness of these solutions and their applications in clinical practice.5,  7

We previously argued that an increased need for home-based-care services might indicate emerging disease in community-dwelling older adults.3,  8 We have used this knowledge to build the Prevention of Acute Admission Algorithm (PATINA),8 a prediction model and decision-support tool that analyses administrative data on home-based-care use and notifies home-based-care nurses about older adults who are at increased risk of hospitalisation. In this trial we aimed to evaluate the efficacy of the PATINA tool in preventing hospital admissions of community-dwelling older adults and the potential to shift service use from secondary care towards primary and municipal care.
Methods
Trial design and participants
The randomised controlled trial (RCT) was done in three Danish municipalities of varying size and organisation. The largest was Odense (with approximately 3951 home-based-care recipients and ten area home-based-care teams), followed by Svendborg (2448 such recipients and seven area teams), and Kerteminde (860 such recipients and three area teams). During the 12 months from June 1, 2020, to May 31, 2021, the PATINA tool was sequentially implemented in the area teams of each municipality (figure 1).8

This sequential implementation in clusters mimicked how the municipalities implement interventions alongside rigorous scientific evaluation,9 and enabled home-based-care nurses to be trained in using the PATINA tool. All three municipalities wished to eventually implement the intervention in all area teams, and the stepped-wedge design allowed the municipalities and area teams to act as their own controls, reducing potential confounders (eg, variations in size, organisation, and case mix).
The study population consisted of all community-dwelling adults aged 65 years or older who received home-based-care services from the included area teams in the three municipalities. The Danish health-care system is tax funded and provides universal coverage.10 Caring for community-dwelling older adults is a cross-sectoral responsibility shared between municipalities, primary care physicians (PCPs), and hospitals. The municipalities provide home-based-care services (eg, home-based care, nursing care, rehabilitation, and long-term care in residential care homes).10 Home-based care is assigned after a needs assessment by a home-based-care officer and provision can be later increased on the recommendation of the usual home-based carer if an individual's functional abilities decline. PCPs provide medical treatment outside of hospitals and are gatekeepers for hospital referrals, including to emergency departments. Hospitals provide specialised inpatient and outpatient treatment.10 Cross-sectoral collaboration is incentivised through copayment schemes and policies.10
Randomisation and masking
The three RCT phases (ie, control phase, implementation phase, and intervention phase) were rolled out sequentially across the area teams in each municipality, with follow-ups at 1 month and 3 months (appendix 4 pp 2–4). In each municipality, teams for individual areas were randomly assigned to cross over to the intervention phase. Owing to differing numbers of area teams in each municipality, crossover occurred every fourth week in Odense, every sixth week in Svendborg, and every twelfth week in Kerteminde, during the 12 months. Computer-generated randomisation by use of Stata (version 16) was done by a statistician not associated with the project.
It was not possible to mask the nurses or the managers of the local area teams, but the dates for crossover to the intervention were masked from the area teams and the project management until 1 month before study inclusion.
Procedures
The PATINA algorithm monitored and analysed use of municipal home-based-care services by determining the amounts of time spent on home-based care, domestic help, training or rehabilitation, and nursing care at the individual care-recipient level. Nurses in the area teams were trained in use of the PATINA tool at the time of randomisation. During the study, weekly information on older adults’ home-based-care use in each municipality was entered into the algorithm, and home-based care use within the past month was automatically compared with mean use during the previous 6-month period.
During the control phase, usual care was provided. The PATINA algorithm identified care recipients at risk of hospitalisation but without notifying the area-team nurses. During the intervention phase, the algorithm notified area-team nurses if an individual increased their use of home-based-care services by more than 17·5% compared with the mean per month for the past 6 months and also received more than 5 h of service per week. The threshold of 17·5% was considered to predict an increased risk of hospitalisation, on the basis of a pilot study.3,  8
For each individual identified by the algorithm as being at risk, the home-based-care nurse received a graph that visualised the person's use of home-based care during the past 6 months, and access to the PATINA decision-support tool. This tool helped nurses to reflect upon subtle signs of health deterioration and to assess the person's situation using validated health assessments and information on risk factors for acute disease (eg, functional level [Barthel Index of Activities of Daily Living-20],11 frailty [Clinical Frailty Scale],12 risk of hospitalisation [Brief Geriatric Assessment],13 medications, fall tendency, bodyweight, mental state (eg, confusion or disorientation), and hydration (fluid balance chart). After assessing the individual at risk, nurses decided whether further action was needed. These actions were not part of the intervention and followed standard national procedures for treatment and care (eg, a visit by the home-based-care nurse or contact with the PCP, who might refer the individual for specialised hospital treatment).10
The home-based-care nurses received the list of people at risk every Monday morning and had 2 days in which to assess the care recipients using the PATINA decision- support tool. On the fourth day (Thursday), data entered in the PATINA decision-support module were assessed by the principal investigator (AF), and any discrepancies were resolved in collaboration with the nurses. The PATINA assessment from the Thursday was saved on the care recipient's electronic care record.
The PATINA data were collected and stored in REDCap (version 9.1.15; Vanderbilt University, TN, USA), an electronic data-capture tool hosted at OPEN—Open Patient data Explorative Network, Region of Southern Denmark. After study completion, the data were transferred for analysis to the research servers of the Danish Health Data Authority and linked to Danish national health registries using each care recipient's social security number.
Outcomes
The primary outcome was hospital admission (the index admission) within 30 days after the individual was identified as being at risk by the PATINA algorithm. For hospital admission, we used the official definition in the Danish National Patient Registry14—that is, a hospital contact lasting 12 h or longer, on the basis of individual contacts (eg, ward admissions, x-rays, or emergency visits) occurring less than 3 h apart.
Secondary outcomes were hospital readmission (ie, hospital admission lasting 12 h or longer occurring between 4 h and 30 days after initial hospital discharge)15 and, within 30 days of identification as being at risk, other hospital contact (ie, hospital contact lasting less than 12 h), outpatient contact (ie, hospital contact lasting 1 h or less), PCP contacts (ie, in-office consultation, electronic consultation, telephone or video consultation, or a home-based visit, based on PCP data in the Danish Health Service Register16), temporary care (defined as a temporary stay in a municipal skilled nursing facility [ie, a municipal facility providing temporary care with nurses present]), and death (using mortality data from the Danish Civil Registration System17). We modified some of the initially planned secondary outcomes of this study.8 Instead of including preventable admissions, we reported on other hospital contacts (ie, <12 h), which we consider a more relevant outcome for researchers and health-care planners. Furthermore, we assessed mortality within 30 days rather than within the planned 90 days, as we realised that assessing mortality at 90 days would introduce a risk of cross-contamination. We also added a secondary outcome on temporary care at a skilled nursing facility, which we believe is an important outcome when assessing the effects of interventions aimed at older recipients of home-based care.
There was no allowance within the data analysis for individuals who had multiple secondary outcomes.
Participants’ age and sex were derived from their social security number (which indicates both). Place of birth and marital status, as recorded in the Danish Civil Registration System,17 were used to define country of origin as Danish (born in Denmark), western (born in the EU, the USA, Canada, Australia, or New Zealand), or non-western (born elsewhere) and to identify the death of a spouse within the past 5 years. We did not have access to race or ethnicity data.
Information on participants’ use of home-based-care services was extracted from the PATINA algorithm, that is, from the municipalities’ administrative systems.
Morbidity was assessed by use of the Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI), on the basis of all primary and secondary discharge diagnoses registered in the Danish National Patient Registry during the past 10 years. The CCI score was classified as low (0), moderate (1–2), or high (≥3).18 Information on COVID-19 infection before or during the study came from the Danish Microbiology Database.19
Medication use was defined as medication purchased within 120 days before study inclusion, by use of data from the Danish National Database of Reimbursement Prescriptions. The Anticholinergic Cognitive Burden Scale was calculated by identifying drugs with anticholinergic properties that were being taken by participants.20 We used the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical classification system20 to identify different types of medication, counted at the fourth level of system coding.
Adverse events were not monitored, as all actions resulting from the PATINA assessment were at the home-based-care nurses’ discretion and were in line with usual care during the control and intervention phases.
Statistical analysis
The study population included approximately 5500–6000 home-based-care recipients living in the community, aged 65 years or older. As per the study protocol, we included all eligible care recipients who exceeded the at risk of hospitalisation threshold of the PATINA algorithm.8 We were unable to identify previous studies that investigated the effect of an algorithm monitoring use of home-based-care services to prevent hospitalisation (primary outcome) in this population, so we used a conservatively estimated clinically important 10% difference between the intervention (10·8%) and control (12·0%) phases. We assumed a one-sided significance level of 0·05, a targeted power of 0·8, an equal sample size between control and intervention phase, and intracluster correlation coefficient (ICC) of 0·01. The calculated power in each municipality was modest (Odense β=0·15, Svendborg β=0·12, and Kerteminde β=0·1) and was only marginally affected by varying sample sizes (not reported). The planned number of clusters (ie, area home-based-care teams) was nine in Odense (we achieved ten), seven in Svendborg (we achieved seven), and four in Kerteminde (we achieved three, owing to organisational changes). The number of sequences was the number of clusters plus one. The planned average cluster size was 31 for Odense, 19 for Svendborg, and 56 for Kerteminde, and was kept constant. Within-person correlations were not considered, attrition was not allowed, and no transition periods were used. Sample size and power were calculated21 using Stata (version 16).
The PATINA algorithm could identify the same care recipient as being at risk multiple times during the control and intervention phases, but we used only the first inclusion for each care recipient in each of the phases. Sample characteristics are reported as percentage, mean (SD), or median (IQR). Differences between municipalities were calculated using the χ2 test for categorical variables and the Wilcoxon test for continuous variables.
We used a Poisson regression model to estimate overall effect of the intervention on primary and secondary outcomes (ie, the first event within 30 days of identification), with the number of days at risk of the outcome as the exposure. The effect of the intervention was the change in incidence after the switch from the control phase to the intervention phase, reported as incidence rate ratio (IRR) and estimated 95% CI. Dispersion tests were used to check for under or over dispersion. In the sensitivity analysis, we adjusted the Poisson regression model for overall differences between the control and intervention phase.
To account for differences in municipality size and organisation of home-based-care services, and to reduce overestimation of risk by failing to account for competing risks, we did a post-hoc survival analysis using a Cox proportional hazard model (mortality) and a Fine–Gray extension for subdistribution hazard ratios (HRs; all other outcomes). We plotted Kaplan-Meier curves for each outcome to enable appreciation of censoring. The proportional hazard function was tested by plotting and visual inspection of Schoenfeld's residuals. In the sensitivity analysis, we used logistic regression models to investigate effects of potential confounders on the intervention's effect in each municipality.
Observed ICC was calculated on the basis of variance estimates in a linear mixed-effects model adjusting for time trend and treatment effect (lme4 package, version 4.0.3, for R).
Data were managed in Stata (version 16). Statistical analyses, modelling, and graphical illustrations used R (version 4.0.3). Statistical significance was set to p<0·05.
The Regional Committees on Health Research Ethics for Southern Denmark found that ethical approval of the study was not required (reference S-20200004). Administrative data (for the PATINA algorithm) on home-based-care service use were provided by the three municipalities via paragraph 10 of the Danish Data Protection Agreement. Access to, and use of, participant data from municipal care records (for the PATINA decision-support tool) were approved by the Danish Patient Safety Authority (reference 31–1521–89). The Danish Data Protection Agency approved the data handling and storage (reference 19/29873).
The study was registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (NTC04398797) on May 13, 2020, and is reported according to the latest CONSORT extension for stepped-wedge cluster-randomised trials22 and the CONSERVE 2021 statement for trials modified because of the COVID-19 pandemic and other extenuating circumstances.23
Role of the funding source
The funders of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report.
Results
During the 12-month period, the PATINA algorithm identified as being at risk 2464 home-based-care recipients (hereafter participants): 1216 (49·4%) in the control phase and 1248 (50·6%) in the intervention phase. Participant characteristics were similar in both phases (median age 85·4 years [IQR 79·4–90·0]) in the control phrase vs 85·8 years [79·3–90·3] in the intervention phase; 64·5% female vs 65·7% female; 35·5% male vs 34·3% male), although participants in the control phase had slightly higher comorbidity than those in the intervention phase (CCI, p=0·015; table 1). The study was completed during the first year of the COVID-19 pandemic,23 but few participants were detected to have COVID-19 during the study.

Poisson regression included 102 individuals hospitalised within 30 days during 33 943 days of risk in the control phase (ie, an incidence of 0·09 per 30 days) and 118 individuals within 34 843 days of risk in the intervention phase (ie, 0·10 per 30 days). For secondary outcomes, the differences between control and intervention phases were greatest for readmissions (0·04 per 30 days in the control phase vs 0·02 per 30 days in the intervention phase), PCP contacts (0·06 per 30 days vs 0·14 per 30 days), and temporary care at a skilled nursing facility (0·01 per 30 days vs 0·03 per 30 days; table 2).

There were no significant differences between intervention and control phases in the numbers of hospital admissions within 30 days (IRR 1·10; 90% CI 0·90–1·40; p=0·28), other hospital contacts, outpatient contacts, or deaths (table 2). We observed a 10% difference in number of hospital admissions (primary outcome), but this was not statistically significant. However, the intervention significantly reduced the number of readmissions within 30 days by 59% (IRR 0·41; 95% CI 0·24–0·68; p=0·0007), increased the number of PCP contacts by 140% (2·4 [1·18–3·20]; p<0·0001), and increased the number of stays in temporary municipal care by 150% (2·50 [1·40–4·70]; p=0·0027). The results remained unchanged after adjusting for overall difference in CCI between the control and intervention phases (data not shown). The observed ICC was 0·014.
The post-hoc subgroup analyses using bivariate analysis showed statistically significant differences between the three municipalities in age, sex, country of birth, need of home-based care, and CCI (table 1). Thus, we have shown Kaplan-Meier curves separately for each municipality (figure 2).

After adjusting for death as a competing risk, the effect of the intervention on hospital admission within 30 days remained non-significant in each municipality (table 3). However, there was a non-significant trend for increased risk of hospital admission within 30 days in Odense (sHR 1·30 [95% CI 0·95–1·90]; p=0·097) but a reduced risk in both Svendborg (0·80 [0·51–1·30]; p=0·33) and Kerteminde (0·98 [0·50–1·90]; p=0·95). The effect of the intervention on outpatient and other hospital contacts remained non-significant, but the intervention appeared to affect these secondary outcomes differently in the three municipalities.

The intervention reduced readmission risk in all three municipalities, and the effect was significant in Odense (sHR 0·36; CI 95% 0·18–0·73; p=0·0042) but not in Svendborg (0·67 [0·27–1·60]; p=0·37) or Kerteminde (0·15 [0·02–1·30]; p=0·083).
After adjusting for competing risk, the intervention was still associated with a significant increase in PCP contacts (Odense sHR 2·46 [95% CI 1·70–3·50]; p<0·0001; Svendborg 2·67 [1·60–4·50]; p<0·0001; Kerteminde 1·59 [0·78–3·20]; p<0·0001).
The intervention was associated with a significant increase in risk of temporary care in Odense (sHR 4·40 [95% CI 1·90–9·90]; p<0·0001), but not in Svendborg (1·00 [0·20–5·00]; p=0·99) or Kerteminde (0·93 [0·19–4·60]; p=0·92).
The overall effect of the intervention on mortality was unchanged but for the risk of dying, there was a non-significant reduction in Odense (HR 0·72 [95% CI 0·70–1·11]; p=0·13), an unchanged risk in Svendborg (0·95 [0·49–1·81]; p=0·88), and an increased risk in Kerteminde (1·29 [0·41–4·08]; p=0·66).
Sensitivity analysis with logistic regression adjusting for age, sex, country of origin, need of home-based care, and CCI, showed that most findings were unchanged, but the intervention phase in Odense was associated with a significant increase in the risk of hospitalisation within 30 days (odds ratio 1·54 [95% CI 1·06–2·27]; p=0·024), and the increase in PCP contacts within 30 days in Kerteminde municipality was not significant (1·73 [0·79–3·93]; p=0·17; table 3).
Discussion
This RCT tested the efficacy of an algorithm designed to alert home-based-care nurses of community-dwelling older adults at risk of hospitalisation. Alerts from the PATINA algorithm and the assessment by the decision-support tool did not lead to an overall significant reduction in the incidence of hospital admissions within 30 days of the alert, but were associated with significantly fewer readmissions, increased contacts with primary care physicians, and increased use of temporary care within 30 days. These findings suggest that administrative data on home-based-care use can help to identify community-dwelling older adults who are at risk of health deterioration and to move resource use from specialised hospital treatment to primary care.
The study did not find that home-based-care use increased in the month after identification by the algorithm, but we did see a non-significant tendency for increased home-based-care use 1 month after hospital admission. This change might indicate that home-based-care nurses were better prepared when participants were discharged from hospital if the participant had been flagged and assessed by the PATINA tool before hospital admission than if the participant had not. Stronger and smoother cross-sectoral collaborations could improve continuity of care through cooperative management of advanced treatments and clearer roles for the health-care professionals and providers of home-based care.1,  24
Post-hoc analyses suggested differing effects of the PATINA intervention on primary and secondary outcomes in the three municipalities, perhaps owing to differences in their capacity (eg, organisational structure and size) and capability (eg, staff composition and experience). The Svendborg and Kerteminde municipalities already had an established workflow for the early recognition of disease between domiciliary carers and home-based-care nurses, possibly making the nursing staff well suited to working with the PATINA tool. The three municipalities also differed on age, sex, country of origin, home-based-care use, and comorbidities. After adjusting for these differences in sensitivity analyses, we found non-significant confounding effects, suggesting that the results of the primary analyses are valid, although the larger size of Odense municipality might have skewed the results. Furthermore, the results from Svendborg and Kerteminde should be interpreted with care, as the sample sizes are small and few events occurred within 30 days. A longer study period would have increased the statistical power to explore differing effects in the smaller municipalities. However, the overall ICC for our primary outcome was slightly higher than the planned ICC, indicating sufficient sample size.
Our results indicate that interventions that target the prevention of hospital admission of older adults can move activity from one health-care sector to another, but also that a greater focus on cross-sectoral management is needed. Hospitalisation of older adults might be difficult to prevent, and additional efforts should perhaps be invested in the quality of care, with the goal of reducing total health-care use. The current study illustrates a collaboration that has benefited both researchers and the municipalities, and the PATINA intervention can now be implemented in routine care. In accordance with the wishes of the three participating municipalities, the intervention has been continued as a 1-year follow-up study, in which all 20 area teams have access to the intervention. The goal is to investigate continued use of the intervention outside of an experimental setting.
During the study, we collected formal feedback from the home-based-care nurses, and a later study will investigate how nurses use the PATINA tool and their perceptions of its potential in daily practice. In short, the home-based-care nurses felt that the intervention supported their professionalism and functioned as a safety net. This factor will be partly because the PATINA algorithm used administrative data that were already being collected (and thus did not require extra data collection or reporting), and the decision tool used familiar assessments of participants’ health status. Algorithms used in health care should support health-care professionals in delivering compassionate care, without taking over their authority.6
A study limitation was the inability to mask the nurses and local area team management to the intervention. We cannot exclude that area teams in the control phase also increased their attention on older adults with worsening health, thus exposing the study to cluster contamination. To reduce this bias, crossover dates were masked until just before inclusion, and the primary investigator had no contact with area teams before their study enrolment. The stepped-wedge design restricted the bias, as area teams were their own controls.9 Additionally, we integrated an implementation period before inclusion8 to ensure the adequate training of nurses in use of the PATINA tool and to minimise delayed treatment effects.
Another limitation relates to the determination of an appropriate threshold for the PATINA algorithm to identify an older community-dwelling adult at increased risk of hospitalisation and thus trigger an alert to the area team. In the current study, we were unable to assess whether the threshold was appropriate or whether we could have achieved a higher predictive value. The threshold was derived from our previous study3 and was adjusted during a pilot study in which nurses providing acute care in the community assessed the relevance of the algorithm's output. Future studies should explore this issue further. A systematic review found that models developed to predict all-cause hospitalisation in community-dwelling older adults were inferior to models to predict preventable admissions.7 However, only two of 19 prediction models included in the review were developed to predict hospital admissions in older adults receiving home-based care.7 The overall methodological quality of the studies was low and the risk of bias high, indicating need for better evidence.
Our study sample included more women than men, probably because women have increased longevity,25 but we found no differential response to the intervention between men and women. The small proportion of participants born outside Denmark is a concern, as this might reflect potential selection bias against community-dwelling older adults with other backgrounds. We do not believe it to be unintentional discrimination by the PATINA algorithm, but rather a reflection of the lower use of home-based-care services among immigrants.26 However, this factor does call for caution and attention in future applications of the PATINA algorithm.
In assessing the effect of the intervention, we were unable to differentiate between the completeness of the implementation of the algorithm and the quality of intervention provided by the home-based-care nurse. These factors are undoubtedly important to the overall effect. Every home-based-care nurse in the included area teams received the same level of introduction to the PATINA tool, but the interventions used in reaction to an algorithm alert were at each nurse's discretion.
Time was a potential confounder (eg, owing to a seasonal effect or because control-phase participants were typically from an earlier calendar time than intervention-phase participants). We documented external events that could influence the participants’ health or the nurses’ use of the intervention. Odense municipality changed its electronic care record (in November, 2020), which affected the algorithm in the form of double registration of home-based-care use, causing the algorithm to alert nurses about older adults who were not at risk. The error was quickly identified and corrected in the following weeks, and we do not believe it influenced the study results.
The study was done during the first year of the COVID-19 pandemic,23 but except for a 2-month delay in starting, the trial was completed as planned with no interruptions. The only other modification was use of a video conference for one PATINA training session with nurses, in place of an in-person meeting (owing to visitor restrictions in the Svendborg area team offices in March, 2021, because of increased COVID-19 infections). The modification was approved by the study team and Svendborg municipality and was not believed to have affected the performance of the area team.
Although our results indicate little influence from the pandemic on the study participants’ health, it will have affected their lives and also the working routines of the nurses using the PATINA tool. We cannot exclude that the pandemic affected the study results, but we can cautiously estimate the direction of any effects. During the first governmental order to shelter at home in Denmark (March–April, 2020), weekly unplanned hospital visits among older adults (age ≥70 years) decreased compared with 2017–19 by 6–28% (IRR 0·94 [95% CI 0·91–0·98] p<0·001 to 0·72 [0·69–0·74] p<0·001), whereas the mortality of older adults increased by 2–26% (mortality rate ratio 1·02 [0·94–1·10] p=0·67 to 1·26 [1·16–1·36] p<0·001).27 It is uncertain whether the magnitude or direction of COVID-19 effects changed over the study period, but we assume that effects were similar for participants in the control and intervention phases.
Regarding the statistical analysis, we had to drop our planned repeated measures analysis.8 Repeated measures were obtained for only a small number of critically ill participants with frequent hospital admissions, which could have led to representativity bias. Likewise, we omitted the planned adjustment for frailty, as a valid measure of frailty could only be obtained for the intervention phase. In a later post-hoc analysis, we will investigate the association between frailty and the primary and secondary outcomes of this study.
A strength of the PATINA algorithm is its use of widely available administrative data on the use of home-based care, so it requires no additional data collection or reporting by home-based-care nurses. The algorithm can be easily adapted and implemented in organisations that deliver home-based-care services to older adults living in the community. Differing treatment and care regimens and health-care spending are often neglected confounders for adverse health outcomes in community-dwelling older adults.28 The PATINA tool was implemented in three municipalities of differing size and organisation to allow appreciation of potentially differing effects. However, external validation of these results in other countries and health-care systems would be relevant. Another study strength was the use of registry data, which allowed complete follow-up and thus minimised missing outcome data.
Specialised hospital treatment is of limited availability and is expensive; with ageing demographics, demand will frequently exceed supply, especially for older adults.29 However, the costs of daily treatment and care of community-dwelling older adults outside of hospital are expected to exceed the specialised hospital costs.30 We intend to further investigate the societal economic consequences of implementing the PATINA tool.
In conclusion, use of the PATINA algorithm and decision-support tool in three Danish municipalities was not associated with a significant reduction in first hospitalisations within 30 days for at-risk community-dwelling older adults. However, use of the PATINA algorithm was significantly associated with other benefits for older adults receiving home-based care, and the intervention has the potential to shift health-care use from secondary to primary care. Further implementation in clinical practice should be informed by analyses of the cost-effectiveness and potential harms and benefits.