
Endoscopic Harvesting Device Type and Outcomes in Patients 
Undergoing Coronary Artery Bypass Surgery
Introduction

Saphenous vein grafts are the most commonly used conduit in coronary artery bypass graft 
(CABG) surgery. [1] Endoscopic vein harvesting (EVH) was introduced as a minimally 
invasive alternative to traditional open harvesting. Meta-analyses and small randomized 
studies have shown that endoscopic techniques reduce wound infections, bleeding, post-
operative pain, and hospital stay durations. [2–7] Based on these findings, a consensus 
statement endorsed the use of EVH over traditional harvesting, and by 2008 it was used in 
approximately 70% of patients undergoing CABG in the United States. [1, 8] In an analysis 
of the Project of Ex-vivo Vein Graft Engineering via Transfection IV (PREVENT-IV) trial, 
we previously reported that EVH was associated with a higher rate of vein graft failure at 12 
to 18 months and long-term mortality. [9] A secondary analysis of the ROOBY trial 
similarly reported lower vein graft patency and higher revascularization rates among patients 
who underwent EVH. [8] However, an analysis of Medicare patients in the Society of 
Thoracic Surgeons National Database reported no relationship between EVH and mortality, 
and among patients in the Northern New England Cardiovascular Disease Study, EVH was 
associated with lower mortality. [10, 11] One possible explanation for these discordant 
results could be the differential use and outcomes of specific EVH device types, though 
none of these studies were specifically designed to assess the comparative efficacy and 
safety of vein harvesting techniques.

There were two commercially available EVH devices used in the PREVENT-IV trial. [12] 
The closed tunnel system occludes the access site with a balloon and insufflates the 
dissection tunnel with up to 15 mmHg of carbon dioxide, whereas an open EVH system 
does not occlude the access site or pressurize the dissection tunnel. It has been hypothesized 
that a pressurized closed dissection tunnel could lead to intraluminal clot formation by 
slowing venous graft blood flow. [13] In addition, in the closed tunnel system the dissector 
tip is bullet-shaped, allowing for more blunt dissection, vs. the open tunnel system that has a 
spoon-shaped dissector tip. The lack of EVH device-specific information at the time of the 
original PREVENT-IV EVH analysis was a recognized limitation insofar as it precluded 
examining whether the observed vein graft failures were associated with specific EVH 
devices. [14] Accordingly, after collecting additional device-specific data, we sought to 
compare rates of vein graft failure and clinical outcomes in patients undergoing closed 
tunnel vs. open tunnel EVH for CABG.

Methods

Patient Population

The design and results of the PREVENT-IV (ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00042081) 
trial have been previously described. [12, 15] Briefly, this was a phase III, double blind, 
multicenter, placebo-controlled, randomized trial designed to assess the effects of 


edifoligide, an E2F transcription factor inhibitor, on ex-vivo vein grafts in patients 
undergoing CABG. A total of 3014 patients were enrolled at 107 sites in the United States 
between 2002 and 2003, and the first 2400 were scheduled to undergo follow-up 
angiography 12 to 18 months after surgery. Patients aged 18 to 80 years were eligible if they 
were scheduled to undergo an isolated, first CABG surgery with two or more vein grafts for 
atherosclerotic coronary artery disease. Major exclusion criteria included planned valvular 
surgery, prior cardiac surgery, non-atherosclerotic coronary artery disease, and comorbid 
illness expected to make 5-year survival unlikely. Each participating site received 
institutional review board approval, and all patients provided informed written consent.

Endoscopic Vein Harvesting Devices and Identification

The primary analysis compared patients who underwent EVH with a closed tunnel system 
(Vasoview, MAQUET, Wayne, NJ [formerly Guidant Corporation, Natlick, MA]) with 
patients who underwent EVH with an open tunnel system (Clearglide, Sorin Group, 
Montvale, NJ [formerly Ethicon Cardiovations, Somerville, NJ, and Datascope INC]). EVH 
device information was obtained by contacting each PREVENT-IV study site. If a study 
hospital used both EVH systems, patient-specific harvesting device information was 
requested. Patients were excluded from this analysis if EVH device information was 
unavailable.

Outcome Measures

Angiographic endpoints were the per-graft and per-patient incidences of vein graft failure, 
defined as stenosis =75% of the vein graft diameter, and vein graft occlusion. All 
angiograms were interpreted in a central core laboratory blinded to harvesting technique 
(PERFUSE Angiographic Core Laboratory, Boston, MA). The angiographic outcomes 
analysis included EVH patients in the aforementioned angiographic cohort who completed 
the 12- to 18-month angiographic follow-up. Individuals who underwent angiography prior 
to 12 months for clinical reasons and met an angiographic endpoint were included in this 
analysis. Patients who died prior to angiographic follow-up were excluded. The primary 
clinical endpoint was the 5-year composite outcome of death, myocardial infarction (MI), or 
revascularization. Other clinical endpoints were the individual components of composite 
outcomes.

Statistical Analysis

The distributions of baseline, peri-operative surgical, and post-operative treatment 
characteristics were summarized with medians and 25th and 75th percentiles for continuous 
variables and with percentages for categorical variables. Group differences were assessed 
with the Wilcoxon rank-sum test (for continuous variables) and the .2 text (for categorical 
variables).

The incidence of vein graft failure was adjusted for predictors previously identified in the 
PREVENT-IV dataset. [16] Vein graft failure was evaluated both at the patient and graft 
levels using mixed-effects logistic regression models. The patient-level graft failure model 
included study site as a random effect and the weight, duration of surgery, graft quality, 
target artery quality, and use of composite grafts as fixed effects. In the graft-level graft 


failure model, both patient and study site were modeled as random effects, while weight, 
duration of surgery, graft quality, target artery quality, and whether the graft was a 
composite or non-composite graft were modeled as fixed effects.

Cumulative event rates and survival curves for the clinical outcomes were calculated by the 
Kaplan-Meier method, and outcome differences were assessed using a Cox proportional 
hazards model. Covariates associated with the primary clinical endpoint have been 
previously published. [9, 17] The variables included in the Cox proportional hazards model 
were age, sex, race, body mass index, hypertension, diabetes, heart failure, New York Heart 
Association class, recent MI, peripheral vascular disease, smoking, chronic lung disease, 
creatinine clearance, and poor target artery quality. A frailty model was used to determine 
whether survival times within study site were correlated and thus required adjustment for 
study site. [18] In a sensitivity analysis, we assessed whether the subset of patients who 
underwent EVH in this substudy (i.e., device type was known) was similar to the group of 
all EVH patients enrolled in PREVENT-IV. We compared the clinical outcome of death, 
MI, or revascularization between 1) the subset of EVH patients used in this substudy and 2) 
patients who had open harvesting that were included in our original manuscript that 
compared EVH with open harvesting.

Results

A total of 1753 patients in the PREVENT-IV trial underwent EVH, and 1549 patients 
(88.4%) from 75 of 107 study sites were included in this analysis. A total of 63 sites 
(n=1153) used only a closed tunnel EVH system, 11 sites (n=210) used only an open tunnel 
system, and one site (n=215) used both systems. At 8 sites (n=175) device-specific 
information could not be obtained, and therefore, those patients were excluded from this 
analysis (Figure 1). From the open EVH group, 180 patients (46%) were from a single 
surgical site. The mean follow-up time was 5.1 years. The proportion of study patients at 
each study site undergoing EVH stratified by harvesting system is presented in Figure 2. 
Baseline differences between the 1159 patients who underwent EVH with a closed system 
(Guidant) and the 390 patients who underwent EVH with an open system (Datascope) were 
generally well balanced (Table 1). Closed system harvesting patients had fewer current 
smokers, a lower prevalence of chronic lung disease, a lower median baseline heart rate, and 
a higher burden of underlying coronary artery disease. Peri-operative surgical and post-
operative treatment variables are presented in Table 2. Open EVH system patients were 
more likely to undergo urgent surgery, undergo on-pump surgery, have a composite vein 
graft, have longer surgical times, and have longer lengths of stay. At 30 days, open EVH 
system patients were more likely to continue aspirin and thienopyridines but were less likely 
to continue statins.

Angiographic Outcomes

A total of 881 (56.9%) patients in this study had a follow-up angiogram within 18 months. 
The incidences of vein graft failure and graft occlusion are presented in Table 3. No 
significant differences were observed in either the per-patient or the per-graft unadjusted 


incidence of vein graft failure or occlusion, a finding that persisted after multivariable 
adjustment.

Clinical Outcomes

The 5-year Kaplan-Meier event rates for the composite outcome of death, MI, or 
revascularization were 23.9% for closed tunnel and 21.5% for open tunnel EVH patients 
(Table 4, Figure 3). After multivariable adjustment, the 5-year risk of the primary composite 
outcome was similar among patients with open harvesting compared with closed harvesting 
(hazard ratio [HR], 0.85; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.66 to 1.10; p=0.221). Among 
secondary clinical outcomes, the 5-year Kaplan-Meier event rate for revascularization was 
numerically lower among patients who underwent open tunnel EVH (12.2% vs. 16.4%); 
however, the relationship was not statistically significant after multivariable adjustment 
(HR, 0.73; 95% CI, 0.53 to 1.03; p=0.072).

In a sensitivity analysis, we compared the outcomes of patients who underwent EVH that 
were included in this analysis with the outcomes of patients who underwent open harvesting 
that were included in our original manuscript. [9] The higher 3-year risk of death, MI, or 
revascularization for patients who underwent EVH compared with those who underwent 
open harvesting was similar to our previously published results (adjusted HR, 1.22; 95% CI, 
1.01 to 1.47; p=0.04).

Discussion

This study, representing the largest device-specific analysis of long-term post-CABG 
outcomes in patients undergoing EVH, has two important findings. First, no difference was 
observed in the rates of 12- to 18-month post-operative vein graft failure or occlusion in 
patients undergoing open or closed tunnel EVH. Second, the 5-year incidences of death, MI, 
or revascularization were similar between the groups of patients who underwent EVH using 
open and closed tunnel endoscopic harvesting devices. Thus, no difference in EVH device-
specific outcomes could be detected to account for the higher incidence of vein graft failure 
and adverse clinical events observed in our previous PREVENT-IV analysis. [9]

As previously mentioned, the greater saphenous vein is the most frequently used CABG 
conduit, and it has traditionally been harvested using a continuous linear skin incision that 
can extend from below the knee to its junction with the femoral vein just below the inguinal 
crease. [1] This technique potentially permits clear vein visualization, mobilization, and 
branch ligation but carries an increased risk of skin wound complications, hematomas, and 
longer hospital stays. [2–5,19,20] In 1996, an endoscopic vein harvesting procedure was 
described as an alternative to standard vein procurement. [21] Multiple meta-analyses and 
small randomized trials subsequently reported advantages of EVH in terms of important 
short-term outcomes such as surgical site pain, cost, patient satisfaction, and harvest-site-
wound complications. [2, 22–24] These analyses were neither powered nor designed to 
detect long-term differences in vein graft failure rates or major adverse cardiac outcomes. 
Observational analyses of the long-term safety of EVH are conflicting. Two studies have 
reported increased harm associated with EVH, including reduced vein graft patency and 
increased revascularization and death. [8, 9] However, studies by Dacey, et al. and Williams, 


et al. reported lower and no difference in long-term mortality, respectively. [10, 11] A 
limitation of all of the aforementioned analyses is a lack of information about EVH 
harvesting devices.

EVH does not describe one homogeneous procedure. As previously mentioned, at the time 
of the PREVENT-IV trial, there were only two commercially available EVH devices in the 
United States—a closed tunnel system (Vasoview) and an open tunnel system (Clearglide). 
A closed system uses a balloon to occlude the device entry site and the dissection tunnel is 
insufflated with carbon dioxide gas at 5–15 mmHg pressure, whereas an open system does 
not use an occlusive balloon and the dissection tunnel is not pressurized. A small study by 
Brown and colleagues reporting a lower unadjusted incidence of intraluminal venous clots in 
patients undergoing EVH with an open tunnel system led to the hypothesis that a pressured 
dissection tunnel can slow blood flow within a venous graft and lead to increased 
intraluminal clot; however, the present analysis did not detect a difference in EVH device-
specific angiographic or clinical outcomes to support this putative hypothesis. [13] The lack 
of an observed difference between open vs. closed tunnel harvesting systems suggests the 
increased risk of vein graft failures and clinical events observed among EVH patients in a 
previous PREVENT-IV analysis were not device-specific. [9] The hypothesis that EVH may 
have detrimental effects on vein grafts is supported by a prospective, small study using 
multiphoton imaging, immunofluorescence, and biochemical techniques that demonstrated 
increased endothelial damage and reduced viability in EVH vein grafts. [25] This finding, 
however, has not been supported by all histologic studies. [26] Importantly, EVH techniques 
continue to evolve, and modern EVH harvesting techniques may be different than those used 
during PREVENT-IV.

Implications for Current Practice and Future Research

Endoscopic harvesting of saphenous vein grafts clearly has important advantages for short-
term outcomes such as wound infections, bleeding, pain, and length of hospitalization. In the 
context of conflicting outcomes associated with EVH in observational studies, which all 
have important methodological limitations, the long-term safety of EVH remains unclear. 
Importantly, we support calls to rigorously evaluate the safety of EVH in angiographic and 
clinical outcomes in an adequately powered randomized trial. [3, 8, 9]

Limitations

This study has several limitations that merit consideration. First, this study did not record 
measures of operator volume, which may be an important determinant of intimal and deep-
vessel-harvesting-related injuries. [27] Second, there was no protocol requirement for pre-
harvest use of heparin, which may reduce vein graft clot burden. [13] Third, although the 
multivariable analysis adjusted for variables known to be associated with vein graft failure, 
the patients included in this analysis were not randomized. Fourth, more than 40% of 
patients undergoing EVH with a Datascope device were from one study site, and no study 
center information was available in our dataset. We attempted to reduce the potential study 
center bias by modeling study center as a random effect when assessing vein graft failure. 
Study center was found to be nonsignificant as a random effect in the frailty model (p=0.96). 
Therefore the Cox proportional hazards models used to assess clinical outcomes did not 


include the random effect for study center. Fifth, the site of vein graph harvesting (thigh 
versus calf) was not available in our dataset. Finally, the 5-year vein graph patency rate in 
this study was lower than in some reports, but is consistent with other published patency 
rates. [8, 28]

Conclusion

In a large cohort of patients undergoing CABG with EVH, no difference was detected in the 
incidence of vein graft failure or occlusion between patients undergoing open or closed 
system EVH. Additionally, no difference was detected in the 5-year incidence of death, MI, 
or revascularization. This analysis suggests that the higher incidences of vein graft failures 
and clinical events observed among EVH patients in the PREVENT-IV population were not 
related to a specific EVH device or system.

