A combination of Tropaeolum majus herb and Armoracia rusticana root for the treatment of acute bronchitis
Introduction
Acute bronchitis is characterized by inflammation of the trachea and the large airways, along with the absence of pneumonia and chronic lung and breathing ailments. This, by definition, is to be differentiated from chronic bronchitis, which is accompanied by pathological changes of the epithelia and therefore classified as a chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), a term summarizing heterogeneous emphysema phenotypes (Sheikh et al., 2016).

Many studies presume acute bronchitis to be usually caused by common cold viruses that generally infect the nasal and oral mucosae, proceeding to enter the lower respiratory tract (Clark et al., 2014; Jonsson et al., 1997; Kinkade and Long, 2016; Worrall, 2008). Bacteria can cause acute bronchitis as well; nevertheless, it contributes to less than 10% of the cases (Kinkade and Long, 2016). However, this assumption is still debated following other studies demonstrating isolated viruses in only 28% of cases, but bacterial origin as the main cause representing e.g. S. pneumonia, M. cartarrhalis, M. pneumoniae (atypical) and others (Macfarlane et al., 2001; Smith et al., 2014). The major symptoms are acute cough and mucous secretion. Patients who have had a cough for at least two days can be diagnosed, and the whole coughing period can last for up to 21 days. Treatments aim to reduce coughing and/or support mucous expectoration, thereby calming and suppressing coughs. Despite recommendations not to use antibiotics medically justified by studies showing no to little beneficial effect of antibiotics for acute bronchitis, antibiotics are often prescribed (Albert, 2010; Kinkade and Long, 2016). In contrast, the so-called “over-the-counter” medications were often used as first-line treatment for acute bronchitis and include antihistamines, antitussives or expectorants by mainly focusing on the symptomatic treatment of acute cough (Albert, 2010; Kinkade and Long, 2016). Phyto-preparations have been proven to be therapeutically very effective. Authorized herbal medicinal products, which frequently contain different herbal materials, exert their therapeutic effect by different mechanisms including anti-inflammatory, antibacterial and antiviral activity (Lin et al., 2014; Theisen and Muller, 2012). For instance, combinations of thyme and primrose (Gruenwald et al., 2006), thyme and ivy leaves (Kemmerich, 2007; Kemmerich et al., 2006), or combined essential oils extracted from plants of the Myrtaceae and Rutaceae families (Gillissen et al., 2013) have revealed encouraging impacts on acute bronchitis symptoms. Additionally, phyto-monopreparations from ivy leaf extracts have been shown to be successful in treating symptoms of acute bronchitis such as cough attacks (Kruttschnitt et al., 2020; Sierocinski et al., 2021). Especially, two double-blind clinical trials of ivy-mono-preparation reported improvement by treatment day 3 (Sierocinski et al., 2021).

Here, we describe the outcome of a clinical study that was performed to test the efficacy and safety of a herbal medicinal product consisting of Tropaeolum majus (L.) herb and Armoracia rusticana (P. Gaertn., B. Mey. & Scherb.) root at a ratio of 2.5:1 (ANGOCIN® Anti-Infekt N) in the treatment of acute bronchitis (Eichel et al., 2020). Both plants are within the order of Brassicales, which produce glycosinolates (also called mustard oil glycosides) as secondary metabolites (Fig. 1). The precursor glucosinolates are metabolized into isothiocyanates (ITCs) by the action of plant myrosinase and undergo further metabolism. ITCs are released following injury or mechanical disruption of the plant tissue and were described to be responsible for the antimicrobial effects (Delaquis and Sholberg, 1997). Different ITCs are part of a plant's defense mechanism and are explored as bioactive compounds in biomedical research, especially for their roles in fighting bacterial infections. Two of the most studied ITCs are allyl isothiocyanate (AITC) and benzyl isothiocyanate (BITC) (Dinh et al., 2021). Preclinical studies of the latter demonstrated besides antibacterial, antifungal and anti-inflammatory properties additional anticancer effects (Dinh et al., 2021). In contrast, AITCs, the major ITC-product in plants such as horseradish, antibacterial and antifungal properties had been shown (Delaquis and Sholberg, 1997).
Due to their antibacterial, anti-inflammatory and immune-modulatory effects, ITCs have been investigated in treating different ailments. ITCs in food or phytomedical products get rapidly absorbed in the intestine, metabolized and eliminated from the human body via kidneys or lungs (Kaiser et al., 2017; Márton et al., 2013). High local concentrations in urine and exhaled air can be achieved (Barba et al., 2016; Kaiser et al., 2017; Romeo et al., 2018), which makes the clinical use of horseradish and nasturtium against urinary tract infections and upper respiratory infections reasonable and relevant. A comprehensive phase I study on oral nasturtium treatment showed exhaled concentrations of BITC and BCN in nanomole (nM) range up to 48 h (Kühn et al., 2018). So far, no data on exhaled ITC concentration or on bioavailable concentrations in different organs and tissue after oral administration of ANGOCIN® Anti-Infekt N to humans are reported. The product contains benzyl isothiocyanate (BITC) from Tropaeolum majus plus allyl isothiocyanate (AITC) and phenethyl isothiocyanate (PEITC) from Armoracia rusticana (Eichel et al., 2020). There are numerous publications supporting the pharmacological activity of ITCs from horseradish root and nasturtium. ITCs from horseradish root are known for its antimicrobial properties, inhibition of proinflammatory processes, inhibition of processes within the cell cycle, influencing apoptotic processes and many more. Pharmacological relevant activities of ITCs from different brassicales species are also described in a review of Ali et al. (2018). ITCs from nasturtium are especially known for their antimicrobial, antifungal, hypotensive, expectorant and possible anticancer effects (Jakubczyk et al., 2018). Its anti-inflammatory properties could be pointed out by blocking lipoxygenase (LOX) and cyclooxygenase (COX) pathways (Tran et al., 2016). Both plants, nasturtium and horseradish are used in the treatment of illnesses of the respiratory and digestive system since ancient times. Furthermore, the investigation on combined Armoracia rusticana and Tropaeolum majus with the same relation found in ANGOCIN® Anti-Infekt N, mean concentrations of 20.78–270.11 nM AITC, 2.75–487.62 nM BITC and 13.82–84.0 nM PEITC were detected in the urine of 5 healthy volunteers (Márton et al., 2013). The efficacy of ANGOCIN® Anti-Infekt N has been proven for treating upper respiratory tract and urinary tract infections (Albrecht et al., 2007; Fintelmann et al., 2012; Goos et al., 2007, 2006; Lau et al., 2018; Stange et al., 2017).

It has become clear that these molecules affect cellular gene expression, including alteration of epigenetic mechanisms, which can change the cells' fate (Mitsiogianni et al., 2020). For example, AITC applied to cultured cells stimulates cytosolic calcium ion release, leading to an increase of proteins associated with endoplasmic reticulum stress and subsequently triggering mitochondria-mediated apoptotic events (Chiang et al., 2020). While these experiments addressed a role in inhibiting cancer growth, ITCs also possess antimicrobial effects and are especially interesting for their use as natural antibiotics (Dufour et al., 2012; Lin et al., 2000). Horseradish contains a common ITC named iberin, which was found to be a very potent inhibitor of bacterial quorum-sensing system. This is an intercellular communication mechanism, which is mediated by diffusible signal molecules and their receptors to synchronize gene expression among a certain bacterial strain. Through this it determines virulence and growth control of a bacterial population in a given niche and thereby defines pathogenicity (Jakobsen et al., 2012; Miller and Bassler, 2001; O'Loughlin et al., 2013; Reading and Sperandio, 2006). Bacteria of the species Pseudomonas aeruginosa were investigated and revealed that iberin can affect a gene regulatory network involving small non-coding RNAs. Through controlling the expression of genes coding for quorum sensing molecules and virulence factors, iberin therefore effectively inhibits biofilm formation (Jakobsen et al., 2012; Tan et al., 2014). Pseudomonas aeruginosa exposed to PEITC in concentrations below the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) significantly inhibited biofilm formation (Kaiser et al., 2017). An ITC combination of AITC, BITC, and PEITC reduced biofilm mass and bacterial proliferation and significantly inhibited metabolic activity in mature biofilms. In addition, ITCs demonstrate immune-modulatory effects as well. Cell culture studies (Herz, 2016) and in vivo models have revealed that ITCs have anti-inflammatory capacity (Greaney et al., 2016; Olcum et al., 2020), influence the number of white blood cells (Imaizumi et al., 2010), and promote the activation of macrophages, a cell type that is the critical ‘first answer’ of the immune system (Tsou et al., 2013). Studies carried out on Tropaeolum majus herb further showed that ITCs inhibit the anti-inflammatory response through LOX and COX pathways signaling (Herz et al., 2017; Tran et al., 2016).

The antimicrobial properties of Tropaeolum majus herb and Armoracia rusticana root were analyzed via bacterial assays revealing that the two plants have a combinatorial effect on a broad spectrum of clinically relevant pathogens, including multidrug-resistant strains (Conrad et al., 2013, 2006). The powdered plant parts have been shown to release high amounts of ITCs when brought into contact with water. These compounds were confirmed to be effective against several oral pathogens, which cause pharyngitis, tonsillitis, and gingivitis, in addition to other organisms, which could induce urinary tract infections, infections of the respiratory tract as well as meningitis and endocarditis, for instance (Conrad et al., 2013; Eichel et al., 2020).

As far as an antiviral activity is concerned, there is evidence for ITC (PEITC) activity in vitro against influenza virus from older publications indicating an indirect mode of action, i.e., inhibition of cellular respiration (Sprössig and Schabinski-Stepan, 1956). More recently, direct activity for BITC against herpes simplex virus (HSV-1) was demonstrated (Al-bagieh, 1992). For sulforaphane (SFN) from broccoli, there is ample evidence besides anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer activities for antiviral activity (Yu et al., 2016) and, most recently, inter alia against the SARS-Cov2 virus (Ordonez et al., 2021).

Herbal medicinal products provide an effective and symptom lowering treatment option for common and uncomplicated diseases of the respiratory tract like acute bronchitis. Here, we describe the investigation of a therapeutic effect of the combination of Tropaeolum majus herb and Armoracia rusticana in the treatment of acute bronchitis.

A very efficient method in assessing the effects of medication in clinical studies is the validated ‘bronchitis severity score’ (BSS), which is the sum of severity rating scores (from 0 to 4) ascertained for coughing, chest pain, mucous production, rales, and dyspnea during the patient's visits to the study site (Gillissen et al., 2013; Gruenwald et al., 2006; Kemmerich, 2007; Kemmerich et al., 2006; Matthys and Kamin, 2013).

Material & methods
Study design
This is a randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial, designed as parallel two-armed, double-blinded, and multi-center. Its aim is to test the efficacy of a herbal drug in treating acute bronchitis with confirmatory biometry.

Study medication
The active medication used in this study was ANGOCIN® Anti-Infekt N, licensed in Germany as herbal medicinal product. The cultivation of the plants is performed according to Good Agricultural and Collection Practices (GACP). Immediately after harvesting, plant material is cut and dried, followed by a gentle thermal germ reduction. When all quality parameters as required by pH. Eur. Monograph ‘Herbal Drugs’ are met, grinding and subsequent homogenisation is carried out leading to a final plant powder with a particle size <300 µm. In general, ITCs are produced via enzymatic hydrolysis of glucosinolates (GLs) by the enzyme myrosinase to exert their beneficial properties on human health (Romeo et al., 2018). GLs and the activating myrosinase are components of both plants- nasturtium and horseradish, respectively. ITCs released during cell destruction normally serve as feeding protection for the plants. Cutting, drying, grinding and homogenizing nasturtium herb or horseradish root inevitably leads to a decrease in the content of GLs and myrosinase in comparison to the fresh material. However, the well-established GMP controlled production process of ANGOCIN® Anti-Infekt N is so gentle that a large part of the active ingredients is preserved in order to release pharmacologically relevant amounts of ITCs in sufficient quantities. This represents the pharmaceutical know-how that significantly distinguishes ANGOCIN® Anti-Infekt N from other preparations releasing ITCs.

The final mixture in one tablet of ANGOCIN® Anti-Infekt N contains 200 mg of nasturtium and 80 mg of horseradish powder. The dried drugs show different GL contents by natural variation, which are approved by the authorities. GLs are analytically determined as glucotropaeolin and sinigrin, recorded for each individual batch and also as a mean value over several batches. To compensate natural variations, the recorded values are taken into account during the manufacturing process. Due to the known degradation kinetics to mustard oils, which are formed from the GLs glucotropaeolin, sinigrin and gluconasturtiin, a fixed release ratio of BITC: AITC: PEITC of 50%: 37.9%: 12.1% (v/v) could be confirmed in further investigations. According to the current data, a GL content of 4 mg/tbl. could be recorded here. A single dose of 4 tablets, as given in this investigation, therefore results in a GL administration of 16 mg, i.e. a daily dose of 48 mg.

The finished product is subject to final testing according to marketing authorization by the Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices (Bundesamt für Arzneimittel und Medizinprodukte, BfArM). This considers as active ingredients of ANGOCIN® Anti-Infekt N the combined powders. Content of the two powders in the finished medicinal product may vary for horseradish root from 76 to 84 mg/ tbl, resp. for nasturtium herb from 190 to 210 mg/ tbl. ITCs are the active ingredients.

Starting on the day of V1, patients were to take four tablets three times a day (morning, midday, evening) for ten or at most eleven days, corresponding to the licensed dosage of 3 × 4 film tablets over 10 ± 1 days. The placebos were matched in their outer appearances in identical sizes and coatings, identical blisters, boxes, and labeling. All boxes had a unique number for their allocation to randomized patients. Study and placebo medication was provided by the marketing authorization holder.

Patients
Patients between 18 and 75 years of both sexes who had acute bronchitis for no more than two days and had a symptom load as measured by the bronchitis severity score (BSS) = 5 (see below) were eligible to participate in this study. In addition to standard exclusion criteria, the following were applied: chronic bronchitis, signs of bacterial bronchitis or other respiratory tract ailments that required antibiotic treatment, asthma, cystic fibrosis, autoimmune diseases, immunodeficiency, alcohol or drug abuse, severe medical conditions related to heart, liver, kidney and the nervous system, hypersensitivity against horseradish root, nasturtium, or excipients. The following medications determined exclusion: immunosuppressants when taken within 8 weeks, and treatment with antibiotics, corticosteroids, or antiviral agents taken within 30 days before screening.

Trial procedures
All patients validated for participation in the clinical trial were entered into a ‘Patient Enrolment Log’ and received a random number as well as medication allocated to this number in the clinic at visit 1. In that manner, both patients and investigators were blind to the kind of medication provided. Randomization occurred in the ratio of 1:1 (verum : placebo). During a ten-day period, the patients attended four visits to the study site with V1 at day 0, V2 at day 3 ± 1, V3 at day 7 ± 1, and V4 at day 10±1.

A 'Short Form Survey' (SF-12) assessing the patient's common health condition was performed at V1, V3, and V4, and blood values were determined at V1 and V4. The efficacy of the medication on acute bronchitis symptoms was evaluated by the investigators by BSS at V1, V2, V3, and V4, and tolerability was assessed at V4. For analyses at home, the patients received a patient diary in which they recorded their body temperature and breathing functions (COPD-Assessment-Test, CAT) daily.

Estimation of efficacy
The primary outcome parameter was the bronchitis severity score (BSS). The BSS sums the scores determined through evaluation of five bronchitis symptoms, which are coughing fits, mucous production, chest pain during coughing, rales detected by auscultation, and dyspnea. The symptoms are rated from 0 (not present) to 4 (severe), so the BSS can have a maximum score of 20 points, showing a comparison between different patients and for one patient at different times.

In addition, the general efficacy of the treatment was determined by the investigator, who rated the symptoms at patients’ visits 2 to 4 with rating scores from 0 to 3 and compared these to baseline status at visit 1 (0 = healed; 1 = improved; 2 = unchanged; 3 = worsened). In this way, ‘responders’ were defined as patients with rating scores 0 or 1 (healed or improved), while ‘non-responders’ had 2 or 3 (unchanged or worsened).

At home, patients documented their bronchitis-related wellbeing using the COPD Assessment Test (CAT) daily. Through a rating scale from 0 to 4, this assesses eight aspects related to breathing and bronchi function. In addition, patients completed the SF-12 questionnaire at the study site to evaluate the common health status related to everyday life at each visit.

Evaluation of safety and tolerability
Vital parameters were ascertained at the study site at each visit. Adverse events were recorded and evaluated at visits 2, 3, and 4. Using the ‘visual analog scale’, the investigator measured the overall tolerability at visit 4. Furthermore, laboratory parameters were taken at visit 4 to be compared with baseline.

Statistical analysis
Patients were randomly assigned into 1:1 treatment groups. randomization was conducted with SAS proc plan in blocks of 4 by study site. Random assignment was performed by the responsible statistician, documented in a randomization list and individually by randomization number in sealed emergency envelopes. The study medication was packaged according to the randomization list and labelled with the randomization number. A copy of the randomization list was provided to the manufacturer. The latter and the statistician were obliged to maintain confidentiality. All other persons involved in the trial (principal investigator, investigators, study nurses, clinical research department, monitors, etc.) did not have access to the randomization list.

The primary outcome was the difference of BSS-scores between groups at day 7 by a mixed-model ANCOVA with treatment group and BSS at V1 as covariates. The alpha level was two-sided (a = 0.05). Primary analyses were based on the intention-to-treat population.

The null hypothesis was that differences of the BSS sum score from baseline (visit 1) to day 7 (visit 3) were indiscriminable between groups if computed in a mixed-effects model ANCOVA with groups and BSS at visit 1 as covariates.

Secondary outcome were between-group comparisons for differences between any pair of visits based on the same mixed-model ANCOVA.

Additionally, several data were evaluated by the physician at all visits, especially the rate of patients who switched to antibiotics due to bronchitis (chi-squared test), the rates of patients with full remission, respectively of non-responders between visit 1 and 4 (chi-squared test), the general efficacy evaluation after baseline and the changes in the CAT-score for COPD and the SF-12 for quality of life were analysed.

In case of missing values, the last observations were carried forward (LOCF). The design was group sequential and adaptive according to O'Brien and Flemings' limits (Chow and Chang, 2008). A protocol-defined interim analysis after 214 patients (56% of 380 pre-planned patients) was made based on an adapted alpha of 0.004. Recruitment was carried on since the p-value did not fall below this limit (p of ANCOVA = 0.0347). For the final stage, an overall alpha limit of 0.0235 was pre-specified in the study protocol. Descriptively means and standard deviations were calculated for continuous data, frequencies, and percentages (e.g. incidence rates) for categorical data. Fisher exact tests were performed to determine the significance of any differences between incidence rates. Mann-Whitney-tests were calculated to show differences in continuous data. Survival curves were plotted using the Kaplan-Meier method (Kaplan and Meier, 1958). Curves of different groups were compared based on the log-rank test. Hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals were calculated using univariate Cox proportional-hazards models (Cox and Oakes, 1984). The descriptive statistical analysis was conducted at a 95% confidence level. A p-value less than 0.05 (2-sided) was considered statistically significant. Sample size assessment was based on data and literature on the test preparation ANGOCIN® Anti-Infekt N to induce a difference of 2 units of the BSS score from baseline to day 7 with a standard deviation of 6 score points. Based on a t-test, a one-sided level of significance of alpha = 0.025 resulted in 380 patients and a power of 90%. Based on these assumptions, the interim analysis has a 40% power to be able to show an ANGOCIN® Anti-Infekt N-related difference. However, based on a standard deviation of 4.5 points, the power is 70% for the first stage.

Statistical analysis was performed with SAS 9.4 and R 4.1. SPSS in version 22 was used to double-check and validate results of primary and secondary parameters.

Ethical considerations
The study was conducted following the Declaration of Helsinki and the regulations of Good Clinical Practice (GCP). The study protocol and the patient information as well as the informed consent form were positively evaluated by the local ethics committees of the investigators and approved by the German Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices (BfArM). Patients provided written informed consent before the examination.

Results
Patient analysis sets
The clinical study was conducted in Germany. 16 study sites could be involved, where altogether 384 patients were randomized to treatment (195, 50.8%) or placebo (189, 49.2%) groups.

Patient demography
250 women (65.1%) and 134 men (34.9%) aged between 18 and 72 years (median 35.0) participated in this study. Of these, 381 (99.2%) were Caucasians, 1 was of African, 1 of Asian, and 1 of other ethnic heritage (Table 1). Age, height, weight, and body mass index did not differ significantly between the treatment groups (Table 2). 25 (12.8%) patients in the treatment and 16 (8.5%) in the placebo group had comorbidities, mainly ailments of the skin, inner organs, bones, muscles, and tendons or surgeries within 12 months before enrollment.
Compliance
18 patients (4.7%) did not comply in time, defined as maximum ±1 day from designated visits. 1 patient failed the criterion for medication compliance, defined as difference between delivered and returned amounts of medication = 85.

Primary outcome
Differences between groups at visit 3 and 1 in the mixed-effects model ANCOVA with group and BSS at visit 1 as covariates were 0.81 score units with a standard error of SE = 0.22 in favor of treatment (p = 0.000243). As this p is lower than the threshold of a = 0.0235 for the 2nd section in the adaptive group sequential design, the null hypothesis ("no treatment difference") could be rejected and the trial be finished. Data were very similar for a PP analysis. Median differences in BSS between visit 1 and 3 were -4.0 ± 2.2 for verum, respectively -3.0 ± 2.8 for placebo.

Secondary outcome
The mean rating scores for different symptoms of BSS such as coughing (fits), mucous production, chest pain, rales, and dyspnea, are entered in diagrams 1 – 5 (Fig. 2), which illustrate a reduction of symptoms in both groups with time. These results also show a statistically significant treatment effect of the herbal medicine over placebo for coughing (fits), mucous production, and chest pain (see diagrams 1 to 3). The decline of symptoms was also examined using the full BSS score as the measure. The mean BSSs were calculated for both groups and differences in values between V1 and V2, V1 and V3, and V1 and V4 were determined (see diagrams 6 and 7). The decreases in BSS rating scores were calculated and recorded in diagram 7, which has the mean BSS at V1 as a zero baseline. The treatment with the active product caused a statistically significant stronger decline of bronchitis symptomatology as soon as three days after medication intake started. The advanced decline of the mean BSS in treated patients continued until the end of the study at visit 4.
By considering patients' BSSs, the investigator defined ‘responders’ and ‘non-responders’ at visits 2 to 4. According to these data, the rate of patients that were healed or improved was significantly higher in the treatment group (62% at day 3, p = 0.001, 93% at day 7, p = 0.050 and 96% at day 10, p = 0.301) compared to the placebo group (43% at day 3, 87% at day 7 and 94% at day 10). For comparison, the investigator also determined an overall status of symptomatology at patient's visits in the clinic. According to this evaluation, similar numbers were obtained - the rate of healed and improved patients at days 3, 7, and 10 were 60%, 94%, and 96%, compared to 40%, 86%, and 94% that had taken the placebo. Based on these results, this study reveals accelerated healing of bronchitis symptomatology in patients who took the test medication.

The patient's self-assessment using the daily CAT showed a relatively mild treatment effect over placebo that was initially noted after four days and became statistically significant at day 8. Differences between the two groups in life quality as determined through the SF-12 survey rating of experienced physical and mental health could not be established.

Safety and tolerability
No serious adverse event (AE) was registered. 46 AEs were classified as light to medium intensity and observed in 36 patients (out of 384, 9.4%). 21 (out of 195, 10.8%) verum patients experienced 28 AEs, 4 (out of 28, 14.3%) of which were classified as ‘likely’, resp. 8 (4.1%) as ‘possibly’ caused by treatment. The experienced events were mainly headaches and gastrointestinal ailments. Because of these, 7 patients (out of 195, 3.6%) in the treatment group left the trial. 18 (out of 189, 9.5%) placebo patients experienced 18 AEs, none was classified as ‘likely’, resp. 1 (out of 18, 5.6%) as ‘possibly’ caused by treatment. There was no study discontinuation in the placebo group.

There were no significant differences between groups for quite a number of standard laboratory values neither at V1 nor at V4. When individual differences between V1 and V4 were compared between groups, there were slight, but significant differences within the normal ranges for thrombocyte count and gamma-glutamyl transferase.

Discussion
The primary outcome parameter differences for BSS between groups at day 7 was significantly different in favor of verum. This trial thus revealed that a combination of Tropaeolum majus herb and Armoracia rusticana root accelerates reversal of symptoms of acute bronchitis. Basically, this had been demonstrated for the same herbal medicinal product in earlier trials with weaker designs, e.g. without placebo control, less precise criteria of inclusion or observation and less standardized treatment parameters (Albrecht et al., 2007; Fintelmann et al., 2012; Goos et al., 2007, 2006).

The symptomatology of acute bronchitis is characterized by an inflamed epithelium of the bronchial tubes and strong mucous secretion, resulting from cytokine release of the neutrophils attracted to the site.

So far, antiviral properties have been shown only for the ITC l-sulforophane against the quite common respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). The antiviral properties of ANGOCIN® Anti-Infekt N are currently being extensively investigated on the effects on typical enveloped and non-enveloped viral strains. Recent data of isothiocyanates anti-viral activity are available from Yu et al. (2016) investigating sulforaphane from broccoli (Yu et al., 2016) and most recently against SARS-Cov2 virus (Ordonez et al., 2022). Furthermore, it could also be considered that patients’ accelerated recovery under treatment might be due to modulating effects on the immune and inflammatory systems. BITC, which is contained in Tropaeolum majus, and AITC and PEITC from Armoracia rusticana have been subjects of analyses in rodents. The substances were found to inhibit major inflammation molecular pathways such as NF-kB and NLRP3 inflammasome activation signaling, alter numbers of neutrophils and lymphocytes (Imaizumi et al., 2010) and activate the immune response (Tsou et al., 2013). Also, direct inhibition of the anti-inflammatory response through LOX and COX signaling pathways shown for Armoracia rusticana and Tropaeolum majus may contribute to the symptom lowering effects (Herz et al., 2017; Tran et al., 2016). Data on pharmacokinetics or bioavailability of ITCs in humans are sparse and mainly from food studies upon administration of different plants. However, several studies in rodents nicely summarized by Lamy et al. (2011), showed a high oral bioavailability (Lamy et al., 2011). The investigation of AITC, BITC and PEITC showed similar results in mice and rats regarding plasma levels ranging from 25 to 250 µmol/kg body weight with the peak around 1 h after administration (Bollard et al., 1997; Brüsewitz et al., 1977; Eklind et al., 1990; Ioannou et al., 1984; Ji et al., 2005; Munday et al., 2008). All investigated ITCs showed the main route of excretion via urine in both rats and mice (Lamy et al., 2011). In contrast, oral bioavailability in humans can only be estimated by the urinary ITC-metabolite recovery which ranges from 14 to 85%, similar to detected levels in rodents (Lamy et al., 2011).

As described above, the efficacy of ANGOCIN® Anti-Infekt N has been proven for treating upper respiratory tract and urinary tract infections (Albrecht et al., 2020, 2007; Fintelmann et al., 2012; Goos et al., 2007, 2006; Lau et al., 2018; Stange et al., 2017). Currently there are no studies simultaneously investigating effects of ANGOCIN® Anti-Infekt N on the urinary tract when treating acute bronchitis. However, the above described elimination pathway of ITCs presumes antibacterial effects on possible pathogenic germs (Conrad et al., 2006, 2013; Eichel et al., 2020).

Symptomatic therapies of acute bronchitis may work even by more mechanisms than the described antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory effects, e.g. by reducing production of mucus, while increasing its fluidity and expectoration. It is presently unknown, whether Tropaeolum majus herb and/or Armoracia rusticana root exert secretolytic/mucolytic and/or bronchospasmolytic effects that could in addition alleviate bronchitis symptoms.

Beside these effects, the proven antibacterial effects of ITCs against a broad spectrum of clinically relevant pathogens, including multidrug-resistant strains (Conrad et al., 2013, 2006) could also play a role in the treatment and prevention of acute bronchitis. When mucus obstructs the airways, antibacterial effects of the ITCs in the preparation could prevent or treat bacterial superinfections. This has been well described in the literature, especially against Haemophilus influenzae.

The three major ITCs from these plant extracts have been tested successfully against 27 isolates of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, selected out of 103 by their highest activities to form biofilms (Kaiser et al., 2017). The formation of biofilms is an important pathogenic factor in bacterial infections of higher organism with their extended mucous membranes. At the moment, there is no routine method to detect the existence of biofilms in an infected individual. Any test of sensitivity against antibiotics for bacteria from suitable materials such as bronchial lavage, is limited to planktonic growth, which is more the exception than the rule in an infected organism. This means that their pathogenicity might be underestimated while being ’fully susceptible’ for the tested antibiotic.

The results presented in this study regarding the combination of Tropaeolum majus herb and Armoracia rusticana root are comparable to previous findings with respect to lowering the BSS in patients with acute Bronchitis comparing placebo treatment to either ivy leaves dry extract, Pelargonium sidoides extract or an extract combination of thyme herb and ivy leaves (Kemmerich et al., 2006). All of these studies showed a significant reduction in the BSS score over the period of treatment at control examination visits between days 2 to 10. The present randomized controlled study with ANGOCIN® Anti-Infekt N therefore confirmed our earlier findings regarding effects in upper respiratory tract infections in medical practice.