Low-fidelity otoscopy simulation and anatomy training: A randomized controlled trial
1. Introduction
The distinction between congestive viral acute otitis media and purulent bacterial acute otitis media can be hard to make for medical students, but middle-ear pathology is a frequent presenting symptom and the distinction is a major public health issue in regard to antibiotic prescription. The cost and side-effects of antibiotics and the massive spread of resistant strains are largely a matter of overprescription [1], [2], [3]. Learning correct use of an otoscope improves students’ ability to diagnose middle-ear pathologies and to make appropriate prescriptions [4]. However, at the end of 3rd-year medical studies, only 5% of students are confident of their ability to perform otoscopy [5]. It is therefore crucial to develop new teaching methods to improve students’ confidence and skills in otoscopy; however, this runs up against two limitations: the curriculum is already overloaded, and the number of students is constantly rising [5]. Simulation is being increasingly developed in the health field [6], for learning techniques, consolidating knowledge and working on transverse skills such as decision-making [7], [8]. Several studies in Canada and the US reported the efficacy of the OtoSim otoscopy simulator in enhancing knowledge [5], [9], but no studies have been made in France, where the medical curriculum is different from that in North America and students have no experience of simulation in any field. Moreover, no studies have assessed the efficacy of the low-fidelity Ear Examination Simulator (Fig. 1A), which is reasonably inexpensive, at €200–400.
The main aim of the present study was to assess the efficacy of an otoscopy simulator as a teaching aid to improve knowledge of middle-ear anatomy and pathology in 2nd-cycle (4th year) medical students as a complement to conventional methods. The secondary objective was to get feedback via a satisfaction questionnaire at the end of the module.

2. Material and methods
Students received 10 hours’ structured teaching in the form of 10 1-hour workshops with a single teacher, over 4 consecutive days 2 weeks ahead of the students’ examination, in April 2019 in the Lyon Sud Medical School (Lyon, France). A knowledge-assessment questionnaire was delivered during the workshop. No documents or corrections were provided between sessions, to reduce preparation bias due to communication of course contents. Fourth-year students, to whom all conventional teaching methods were available (lectures, e-learning, reading lists at the university library) and who were taking part in their first otoscopy simulation, were included. Exclusion criteria comprised: not coming to the class, not filling out the questionnaire, and having already experienced simulation as part of their studies. Students were randomized by groups of 20, ensuring comparability for transverse analysis of results. Knowledge-assessment questionnaire data (response time, 5 min) were collected either at the beginning (control group, n = 95) or the end of simulation (simulation group, n = 105). Teaching comprised 3 stages: description of tympanic iconography (5 minutes), learning technique (5 minutes) and simulation training (40 minutes), for a mean 35–40 minutes’ otoscope handling per student. The randomized study design with control group received IRB approval (no 19-99) on 16 July 2019, and was not subject to French data protection regulations or legislation.

The low-fidelity Ear Examination Simulator (Life/form, Fort Atkinson, WI, USA) is specifically designed to precisely model the esthetic aspect and dimensions of the outer ear, tympanum and middle ear (Fig. 1A). Color images of the tympanum are printed out and applied to the tympanic membrane of the model to create a realistic experience similar to patient consultation conditions. The silicone ears are interchangeable, allowing multiple images to be visualized in a short time. Their flexible consistency provides resistance requiring the same manipulation technique as for a human patient, allowing the student to be immersed in a realistic experience. After 1 year's use with 200 students for 10 hours’ teaching, the only component needing replacement was the otoscope batteries. Images showed normal tympanic membrane (Fig. 1B), seromucous otitis media, congestive acute otitis media, purulent acute otitis media and tympanic perforation. The questionnaire comprised 15 questions. The first 5 were multiple choice questions (MCQ: Q1 to Q5, cf. Online supplement) validated by faculty ENT teachers for knowledge assessment. Each comprised 5 statements to be marked true or false. The next 5 questions were closed questions assessing course quality on a Likert scale (Q6 to Q10). The next 4 (Q11 to Q14) were open questions for free feedback. Finally, Q15 assessed the interest of continuing the workshop in an already full curriculum. The satisfaction questionnaire is shown in Table 1.
The main endpoint was the grade differential on the knowledge assessment questions (Q1 to Q5) between the simulation and control groups. Two particular points were studied descriptively in the secondary analysis: (i) grades per knowledge assessment question according to group; and (ii) satisfaction on the Likert scale and free feedback (Q6 to Q14). All students had had 8 hours’ theoretical ENT teaching (4 2-hour interactive classes). Lectures were optional; participation varied between specialties and was difficult to assess as students were not required to sign in. Further supports were available on the faculty e-learning site.

Intergroup comparison of means for non-matched samples used the parametric Student test after checking normal distribution. Qualitative analysis of free comments by 2 blinded observers identified the key points in the satisfaction survey. The global MCQ grade (out of 20) was divided into quartiles for descriptive analysis. Four questionnaires were excluded as not being complete. The significance threshold was set at 0.005 in line with recent studies of more reproducible evidence-based medicine [10], [11]. Analyses used R software version 3.5.3 (www.r-project.org).

3. Results
3.1. Population and questionnaire response
The randomized groups of 20 were positioned in the room in 4 subgroups of 5 each for 1 simulator with 5 otoscopes and 5 interchangeable ears. The knowledge assessment questionnaire was filled out by 93 of the 95 control students (98.0%) and 103 of the 105 students in the simulation group (98%). The 4 incomplete questionnaires were due to networking error. 191 students filled out the satisfaction questionnaire (Q6-Q14) and question 15.

3.2. Knowledge assessment
In the simulation group, 74.8% of students (77/103) had a mean score >10/20 on the 5 MCQs, versus 37.6% (35/93) in the control group (Table 2). Mean score on the 5 MCQs was respectively 12.0/20 (range, 5.6–16.8) and 9.1/20 (range, 0.0–18.0), for a difference of 2.4 points (95% CI: 2.0–3.9; P < 0.0001; Fig. 2) or 32.0%. Means scores per question were all better in the simulation group, although only slightly for questions 2 and 3. Table 3 shows item scores according to group.
3.3. Satisfaction
All but 1 of the respondents (190/191) were in favor of keeping the simulation workshop in the curriculum (Q15). 184 (96.3%) were satisfied or very satisfied with the quality of the module (Q6) and 175 (91.6%) were satisfied or very satisfied with the 3-stage structure (Q7). Although the teacher/student ratio was 1:20, 153 respondents (80.1%) found the teacher's availability very satisfactory (Q8). 49 (25.7%) “completely agreed” that they had gained confidence in otoscopy, while 13 (7.3%) “partly” or “totally” disagreed (Q9). A large majority (169/191; 88.5%) agreed or completely agreed that their interest in ENT as a future specialty had been enhanced. Several advantages of the new otoscopy teaching method were highlighted: (i) it is more suitable than bedside teaching as a first experience; ii) learners can take their time in acquiring the basic gestures in a safe environment; iii) there is not the stress caused by the patient's discomfort. The most frequent descriptors were “very good”, “instructive” and “interesting”. The otoscopy simulation workshop was ranked top among the various ENT teaching modalities in 4th year (Q12). Respondents were very satisfied (121/191) and many had no criticisms to make; among the few critical comments were that the workshop was too short and that iconographic quality was insufficient (Q13). Suggestions for improvement (Q14) comprised (i) increasing workshop duration, (ii) increasing the number of images per session, and (iii) students practicing on one another after the first practice on the model.

4. Discussion
Low-fidelity otoscopy simulation is an effective teaching aid in improving knowledge of middle-ear anatomy and pathology compared to conventional methods.

The target population for otoscopy simulation is students in the early stages of their training who have not yet acquired all the fundamental knowledge. One objective is to enhance their confidence in performing an important procedure. Lack of clinical experience and lack of time in consultation undermine students’ self-confidence. Conversely, simple tasks performed in a safe environment stimulate confidence [12]. Low-fidelity simulation in a structured environment is thus well suited to learning otoscopy, familiarizing the student with a wide range of pathologies. Moreover, the module format with workshops of 20 students in groups of 5 per simulator promotes student/student and student/teacher interaction. Otoscopy simulation is thus of great interest for medical studies, but should not replace otoscopic examination performed by the student in his or her various placements. This novel teaching aid complements conventional methods in a curriculum that is changing with reforms to medical studies in France.

Davies et al. and Lee et al. assessed the feasibility and efficacy of another otoscopy simulator, OtoSim (MaRS Innovation Center, Toronto, Canada), for 1st and 2nd year students [5], [9]. This is an online simulator with silicone interface, presenting several hundred high-resolution images of middle-ear pathology for several students at the same time [13]. Davies et al. [9] organized a session for 92 students at the same time, with a better teacher/student ratio (1:6) than in the present series (1:20). 31 of the 34 respondents (91.0%) were satisfied or very satisfied. All were in favor of simulation training compared to conventional teaching. These results are to be interpreted with caution, given the sample size (n = 34) and low response rate (36.9%) [9]. Moreover, knowledge and skill were not compared versus a control group, limiting the internal and external validity of the study. The rate of reported enhanced self-confidence in performing otoscopy was higher for Davies et al. (24/34; 71.0%) and Higgins et al. (68-72%) than in the present series (108/191; 56.6%) [9], [14]; but confidence in performing otoscopy is not necessarily an indicator of improved otoscopic diagnostic performance [15].

Morris et al., comparing otoscopy simulation versus conventional teaching, found a significant advantage [16]. However, this was using an air insufflation simulator assessing tympanic resistance, making extrapolation to conventional otoscopy in general practice hazardous. Finally, Wu et al. reported significant improvement in diagnostic accuracy (P < 0.001) and otoscopy skills (P < 0.001) with simulation training compared to computer-assisted training or conventional lectures [17].

The main strong-points of the present study were the large number of students included (n = 200) and the high complete response rate (98.0%). The satisfaction questionnaire was approved in the literature [5], [9], whereas the validity of satisfaction surveys is always hard to establish [18], [19]. Study limitations comprise the lack of a third group with 1 hour's otoscopy training without simulation. Some of the improvement in MCQ score was due to the supplementary training session, whether this involved simulation or not. However, use of a control group rather than a before-and-after design limited this bias, as did the fact that sessions were held just before the students’ examinations so as to homogenize knowledge. Another limitation was that improvement in knowledge was assessed only in the short term; reassessment at 3 months with a group of students who had not received simulation training would be useful, but was not feasible as all students had simulation training, for equity's sake. And finally, it is now agreed that knowledge assessment by MCQ (level 1 in Kirkpatrick's pyramid) fails to assess the multiple qualities required of future physicians to improve the health status of their patients (Kirkpatrick level 4) [20]. Skill assessment by “structured objective clinical examination”, currently being developed within the curriculum, would be more suitable. However, we chose knowledge assessment for 3 reasons: (i) medical students are on a highly competitive course; (ii) selection is still made by knowledge assessment; and (iii) peer assessment of skill is subjective, and could not be performed blind to the student's identity. The aim was to develop an efficient yet entertaining method of teaching suited to the student's situation of preparing for a national competitive examination at the end of the 2nd cycle (6th year).

5. Conclusion
Low-fidelity otoscopy simulation is an effective complement to conventional teaching methods. Improved knowledge, high satisfaction and low cost should encourage medical schools to include this approach in the curriculum. It would be very interesting to assess the long-term sustainability of the short-term improvement in knowledge found here, in comparison with students receiving the conventional curriculum without simulation.