Effect of synbiotic supplementation on immune parameters and gut microbiota in healthy adults: a double-blind randomized controlled trial
Introduction
Gut microbiota constantly interacts with the host immune system, maintaining the homeostasis of normal physiology and function.1 Due to this dynamic bidirectional relationship, modifying the gut microbiota may regulate immune function and host susceptibility to infection.2 Therefore, gut microbiota-targeted measures for enhancing human immunity capacity gain growing attention.

Synbiotics, as a mixture of live microorganisms (e.g., probiotics) and substrates (e.g., prebiotics) that are selectively utilized by host microorganisms, have emerged as potential modulators of gut microbiota and immunity.3 The synbiotic and its main ingredients, probiotics as well as prebiotics, have been demonstrated to improve inflammation biomarkers in individuals under pathological conditions.4–7 In contrast, evidence regarding the immunity-regulating effects of synbiotic products in healthy individuals is limited and yields inconsistent results.5,8 However, in recent years, the use of synbiotic products has increased in the general population, particularly among individuals with self-rereported favorable health quality, as a means to boost their immunity.9 Therefore, investigating the effects of synbiotics on immune parameters in healthy individuals has significant implications. Moreover, whether microbial alternation induced by synbiotic supplementation contributes to its immunomodulation properties is poorly understood. Recent studies have revealed that individuals with different enterotypes, identified based on the ratio of Prevotella-to-Bacteroides (P/B), respond differently to a specific diet for weight control.10–12 Nevertheless, the potential influence of microbial enterotypes on the immunomodulatory effects of synbiotics remains unclear.

Species or strains from Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium are prominent probiotics possessing immunomodulation properties.13 Notably, Bifidobacterium lactis (B. lactis HN019) and Lactobacillus rhamnosus HN001 (L. rhamnosus HN001) have demonstrated immunity-enhancing properties, particularly when combined with oligosaccharide-rich substrates, in both animal and human models.14–16 Based on this knowledge, our study aimed to conduct a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial to investigate the immunomodulatory and microbial effects of a synbiotic supplement (comprising B. lactis HN019, L. rhamnosus HN001, and fructooligosaccharide). Specifically, we intended to address the following three questions: (1) Could synbiotic supplementation induce alternations in immune parameters among healthy adults? (2) Were these alternations associated with gut microbiota variations triggered by synbiotic supplementation? (3) Were synbiotic effects affected by microbial enterotypes, as inferred from the pre-treatment P/B ratio?

Results
A total of 170 individuals were initially screened for eligibility, of whom 106 subjects were eventually enrolled. No one dropped out or was excluded for noncompliance throughout the study (Figure S1 in Supplementary material). There was no adverse event reported during the intervention. Baseline characteristics were well-balanced between the two groups (Table 1). Physical activity, dietary intake, and healthy food diversity index17 remained unchanged in both treatment groups (Table S1 in Supplementary material).
Effects on immune parameters
As shown in Figure 1, an 8-week supplementation with synbiotic significantly reduced plasma C-reactive protein (CRP) by 21% (P = .005) and interferon-gamma (IFN-?) by 12% (P = .008) compared to baseline. These reductions were greater than those observed in the placebo group (P = .088 for CRP, P = .008 for IFN-?). Plasma interleukin (IL)-10 remained unchanged in the synbiotic group but decreased by 16% at week 8 in the placebo group (P < .001). Consequently, there was a statistically significant increase in IL-10 levels in the synbiotic group compared to the placebo (P = .008). Furthermore, the level of fecal secretory IgA (sIgA) increased by 24% following the 8-week synbiotic intervention (P = .043), resulting in higher growth in the synbiotic group relative to placebo (P = .014). The plasma concentrations of IL-6, IL-8, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a) as well as the saliva level of sIgA varied similarly in both treatment groups. Moreover, we observed that synbiotic supplementation consistently led to greater reductions in plasma CRP in men compared to women (week 4: P = .040; week 8: P = .016). Similarly, only male individuals exhibited a significant down-regulation trend in plasma IFN-? and an up-regulation trend in IL-10 and fecal sIgA compared to placebo (Figure S2 in Supplement material).
Minor within-group changes were observed in the absolute counts of T lymphocytes, B lymphocytes, and natural killer cells, but no significant between-group difference was found (Table 2). Physiological and biochemical markers, including body weight, body mass index (BMI), blood pressure, body fat percentage, and indicators regarding glucose and lipid metabolism, did not differ between the synbiotic group and placebo group (Table S2 in Supplementary material). Additionally, synbiotic supplementation did not reduce the occurrence of upper respiratory tract infection (URTI) episodes or affect the average duration and severity of each URTI episode (Table S3 in Supplementary material).
Effects on gut microbiota and their association with immunological improvements
Amplicon sequencing was performed on 318 stool samples, resulting in a total of 21,879,501 sequences. The most abundant phylum was Firmicutes (72.2%), followed by Bacteroidota (14.4%), Actinobacteriota (9.2%), and Proteobacteria (3.8%). These four phyla comprised approximately 99.6% of the gut microbiota.

During the intervention, alpha indices and beta diversity based on Euclidean and weighted UniFrac distances did not differ between the synbiotic and placebo group (Figure S3 in Supplementary material). The composition characteristics of gut microbiota in participants before and after the synbiotic supplementation were described in Figure 2. At the genus level, synbiotic supplementation increased the relative abundance of Collinsella (median fold change (FC) = 1.76, P = .004, false discovery rate (FDR)-P = .034), Bifidobacterium (median FC = 1.80, P < .001, FDR-P = .004), Lactobacillus (median FC = 2.67, P < .001, FDR-P = .007), and Clostridium_sensu_stricto_1 (median FC = 3.08, P = .019, FDR-P = .095), whereas decreased the relative abundance of Parabacteroides by 49% (P = .009, FDR-P = .063) compared to baseline (Figure 3a). None of these microbial alternations were found in the placebo group (Figure S4 in Supplementary material). Compared to placebo, synbiotic supplementation remarkably enriched Lactobacillus (P for interaction = .001, Figure 3b). Notably, our subgroup analysis demonstrated that the administration of synbiotic supplements induced more variations (including Collinsella, Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, and so on) in female individuals, particularly at week 4 of the intervention (Figure S5 in Supplementary material). At the zero-radius operational taxonomy unit (zOTU) level, zOUT103 within L. rhamnosus, zOTU1158 as well as zOTU2973 within B. lactis substantially increased in the synbiotic group relative to the placebo (all P for interaction < 0.001, Figure 3c–e). Moreover, our analysis of predicted functional pathways identified eight pathways related to the biosynthesis of several amino acids and short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) enriched in the synbiotic group compared to the baseline (Figure 3f).
Spearman correlation analysis indicated a significant negative correlation between the decrease of Parabacteroides and the growth of plasma IL-10 in the synbiotic group (r = -0.208, P = .041). Moreover, the enrichments of several pathways concerning the amino acids or SCFAs biosynthesis were positively correlated with the increase of anti-inflammatory markers (plasma IL-10 or stool sIgA) (all P < .05) (Figure 4). There was no measurable distinction in the modifications of stool acetate, propionate, butyrate, or total SCFAs between the two groups (Table S4 in Supplementary material).
Synbiotic effects were modified by microbial enterotypes
The log-transformed pre-treatment P/B ratio exhibited a bimodal distribution (P = .006, Figure S6 in Supplementary material). Accordingly, all the subjects were stratified into two microbial enterotypes, low P/B ratio (LP, n = 65) and high P/B ratio (HP, n = 40), with a cutoff value of 0.1. Throughout the intervention period, no significant effect of synbiotic products on the P/B ratio was observed. At baseline, the HP group had a higher BMI (P = .031) but lower plasma high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (P = 0.031), saliva sIgA (P = 0.017), and stool sIgA (P < .001) than LP (Table S5 in Supplementary material).

As depicted in Figure 5a, plasma CRP continuously declined in the synbiotic_HP group (week 4: mean FC = 0.69, P = .002; week 8: mean FC = 0.61, P < .001). Moreover, the reduction was more pronounced in the synbiotic_HP group than that in the placebo (P = .006) and synbiotic_LP (P = .017). Similarly, synbiotic supplementation induced a drop of 19% in plasma IFN-? in the HP group (P = .010), which was significantly different from the placebo (P = .017, Figure 5b). Although no marked change was observed in plasma IL-10 in the synbiotic_HP group, it decreased by 17% in the placebo group (P < .010). Consequently, there was a rise in IL-10 (P = .002) in synbiotic_HP compared to the placebo (Figure 5c). At the end of the intervention, stool sIgA increased by 67% within synbiotic_HP (P = .007), resulting in a greater increase in the synbiotic_HP than that in the placebo (P = .008, Figure 5d). However, no detectable difference in immune parameters was found between the synbiotic_LP and placebo. Furthermore, we observed an inverse correlation between CRP change and the baseline P/B ratio in the synbiotic group (r = -0.302, P = .003, Figure 5e).
There was no substantial difference in alpha diversity before and after intervention in both HP and LP groups. However, principal component analysis of gut microbiota composition revealed a divergence following synbiotic supplementation in the HP group (week 4: P = .042; week 8: P = .033), but not in the LP group, suggesting a maladaptation of gut microbiota in LP (Figure S7 in Supplementary material). Furthermore, significant increases of Clostridium_sensu_stricto_1, Lactobacillus, and Collinsella observed in the whole synbiotic group were only found in HP (Figure 5f). Notably, Lactobacillus enhanced much more in synbiotic_HP than that in the placebo (FDR-P = .011). None of these bacteria significantly altered in both the synbiotic_LP group and the placebo group. Besides, synbiotic supplementation tended to induce a higher growth of Bifidobacterium in HP than that in the LP or placebo group, but their between-group differences were non-significant. No measurable difference was found in the functional capacity among synbiotic_HP, synbiotic_LP, and the whole placebo.

Discussion
In the current study, we found that daily supplementation of synbiotic supplements for 8 weeks altered systemic inflammation markers (plasma CRP, IFN-?, and IL-10) and mucosal immunity markers (stool sIgA) in healthy adults. We also found that synbiotic supplementation increased beneficial bacteria (Collinsella, Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium, and Clostridium_sensu_stricto_1) as well as functional pathways related to the biosynthesis of amino acids or SCFAs, whereas reduced certain potential pro-inflammation bacteria (Parabacteroides) compared to baseline. Moreover, alternations in IL-10 and stool sIgA were correlated with microbial variations induced by synbiotic supplementation. Importantly, the aforementioned synbiotic effects were more favorable in subjects with a higher pre-treatment P/B ratio.

Our results showed that synbiotic supplementation decreased pro-inflammatory biomarkers (CRP and IFN-?) and increased anti-inflammatory cytokine (IL-10) among healthy adults. Existing evidence regarding the impacts of synbiotics on inflammatory markers in healthy populations is limited and has yielded inconsistent results. Some studies suggested that synbiotic supplementation did not alter systemic CRP, IL-10, or IFN-?,18–20 while others found an improvement in CRP or IL-10 following the synbiotic intervention.21–23 However, it should be noted that the synbiotic formula used in the above-mentioned studies differs from the one applied in our study, and the efficacy of its major ingredients (probiotics) has been validated to be strain-specific. Previous evidence supported the immunity-enhancing properties of L. rhamnosus HN001 and B. lactis HN019, which represented the main components of the synbiotic used in our study. B. lactis HN019 has been extensively reported to enhance systemic cellular immunity, including T lymphocytes, polymorphonuclear cell phagocytosis, and NK cell killing activity.16,24 Likewise, L. rhamnosus HN001 has also been suggested to enhance natural and acquired immunity in animal and human experiments.14,25 Additionally, we also observed an increase in the concentration of fecal sIgA, which was widely used as a marker of mucosal immunity.26 In line with this, several clinical trials have reported that daily supplementation of synbiotics increased fecal sIgA among healthy infants,27 children,28 adults,29 and the elder population.30 Hence, our results provided a better understanding of the ability of synbiotics to regulate systemic inflammation and mucosal immunity.

This study also found that synbiotic supplementation altered the gut microbiota composition and functional potentials. Firstly, zOTUs within L. rhamnosus or B. lactis dramatically increased in the synbiotic group, indirectly indicating the successful survival of the ingested B. lactis HN019 and L. rhamnosus HN001. This finding is consistent with previous probiotic intervention trials in infants31 or elderly subjects.32 Secondly, the synbiotic intervention significantly increased several beneficial bacteria, including Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, Collinsella, and Clostridium_sensu_stricto_1. Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus were widely used as probiotics for their perceived health-promoting effects,33 including inhibiting pathogens, increasing the production of SCFA, and optimizing colonic function.34 Collinsella and Clostridium_sensu_stricto_1 were SCFA-producing bacteria,35 and indirectly involved in the process of immunoregulation.36,37 Thirdly, synbiotic consumption reduced Parabacteroides, which was associated with pro-inflammatory responses in Crohn’s disease and potentially involved in the pathogenesis of diabetes cardiovascular disease.38 Lastly, synbiotic supplementation enriched metabolic pathways facilitating the biosynthesis of L-methionine, S-adenosyl-L-methionine, and SCFAs. These alternations were positively correlated with changes in anti-inflammatory biomarkers such as IL-10 and sIgA. Correspondingly, the microbial biosyntheses of L-methionine and S-adenosyl-L-methionine were involved in cognitive and metabolic health.39,40 SCFAs, particularly butyrate, played a crucial role in maintaining intestinal homeostasis through anti-inflammatory actions.41,42 Collectively, our results highlighted the beneficial impacts of synbiotic supplementation on gut microbiota, with the observed microbial variations being associated with the immunoregulatory changes induced by synbiotic supplementation.

Our results indicated a sex-specific response in immune parameters and gut microbiota composition to the synbiotic intervention. Although sex differences have been observed in immune responses43 and gut microbiota,44 there are limited studies investigating the influence of gender on the immunomodulatory effect of synbiotics or probiotics. In an animal study, the expression of TNF-a was increased by a high-fat diet in male rats and then decreased with medium concentration following probiotic intervention.45 Furthermore, sex differences have also been found in microbial effects of pre- and probiotic treatments in animal studies.46 However, in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study involving patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, probiotic supplementation reduced CRP levels, without any differences between men and women.47 Notably, the sex-specific difference in response to synbiotics/probiotics might be attributed to sex hormones, which are associated with microbiota differences and systemic immunity.46 Therefore, there is a need for more gender-focused research to gain valuable insights into sex-specific responses and comprehensively understand the underlying mechanisms.

Although several immune parameters were improved by synbiotic supplementation, the response effects showed larger individual differences. As reported in previous studies, baseline gut microbiota influenced the potential responsiveness to the same diet.48 In this context, we observed that the synbiotic supplement exerted a more favorable effect on immune parameters and gut microbiota in individuals with a higher pre-treatment P/B ratio. To date, there are few studies investigating the effect of the pre-treatment P/B ratio on responses to the synbiotic supplement. Sandberg et al reported that individuals with a higher P/B ratio displayed a lower insulin response and a lower IL-6 concentration, independently of the intervention.49 Song et al showed that probiotics intervention exerted a better effect on obesity-related biomarkers, which is associated with chronic low-grade inflammation,50 in the obese population with Prevotella-dominant enterotype.51 Some studies have proposed that individuals with Prevotella enterotype mainly depend on SCFA production to promote health,52,53 while individuals with Bacteroides enterotype are more likely to improve health via bile acids modification.54 However, no remarkable difference in fecal SCFA shifts was detected between the synbiotics and placebo group in our study. Additional studies with metagenomics analyses are warranted to comprehensively understand the clinical relevance of the pre-treatment P/B ratio and its implications on the response to synbiotic supplementation.

There are several strengths of the present study. Firstly, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to find that the immunoregulatory and microbial effects of the synbiotic supplements are modified by the pre-treatment P/B ratio. Secondly, the participants were instructed to maintain their routine diet and physical activity. This was ensured by closely monitoring their dietary intakes and levels of physical exercise, thereby promoting stability in these lifestyle factors. However, there are certain limitations to acknowledge in this study. Firstly, although our results have demonstrated the beneficial effects of an 8-week duration of synbiotic supplementation, further investigations are required to assess the long-term effects of this intervention. Secondly, the 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing approach provided limited insights into the species or strain levels. Although we observed microbial changes at the zOTU level, additional comprehensive metagenomic studies would be desirable to gain insights into the gut microbiota dynamics.

In conclusion, an 8-week synbiotic supplementation altered immune parameters and modified gut microbiota in healthy adults. Furthermore, changes in anti-inflammatory markers (IL-10 and sIgA) were associated with microbial variations triggered by the synbiotic supplementation. Moreover, the immunomodulatory and microbial effects of synbiotic supplements were modified by enterotypes based on the basal P/B ratio. These findings provide evidence for the use of synbiotics to improve the immune function of healthy adults. The use of basal P/B ratio holds great promise for personalized supplementation of synbiotics for immunomodulation, but additional randomized controlled trials with larger numbers of participants are needed to confirm these findings.
