Providing genetic testing and genetic counseling for Parkinson's disease to the 
community.

Introduction
One of the greatest clinical challenges in Parkinson's disease (PD) is the lack of pharmacological treatments that slow progression of the neurodegenerative process, despite the effort of multiple clinical trials. One potential reason many trials have failed is that PD may have different etiologies linked to variable biological mechanisms. Supporting this hypothesis are the large number of Parkinson’s genes contributing to risk that have been identified, including leucine-rich repeat kinase-2 (LRRK2, HGNC:18618) and glucosylceramidase beta 1 (GBA1, HGNC:4177 [formerly known as GBA]). Up to 40% of affected individuals in certain populations carry a pathogenic GBA1 or LRRK2 variant.1,2 In recent years multiple clinical trials targeting genetic pathways have launched, but people with Parkinson’s disease (PwP) are often unaware of their genetic status and therefore not available to participate.3
Although studies have shown that there is significant interest in genetic testing and counseling among PwP and their first-degree relatives,4,5 few have undergone genetic testing. Historically, clinical genetic testing for PD has been reserved for those from specific, high-risk backgrounds, such as Ashkenazi Jewish, those with strong family histories, or those with early onset of disease.6 This selective genetic testing likely results in many missed individuals who harbor pathogenic variants.3
Major barriers to PD genetic testing include hesitancy of clinicians who believe there is lack of patient interest, perceived low clinical utility, excessive cost, and fear of discrimination based on genetic test results.3 Clinicians and their patients may not have access to genetic counselors for guidance and assistance on selection of appropriate genetic tests. There are no recent, formal guidelines for PD genetic testing.3 Laboratories offer many PD genetic tests with panels comprising as few as 5 genes to 60 or more, with no clear guidance on which to choose.4 The result may either be under testing or over testing related to the patient’s history.7 Although direct-to-consumer genetic testing offered by commercial companies has increased access to testing, there may be limitations related to the scope of testing. Also here, tests can be too narrow or broad and often lack interpretation via post-test genetic counseling.7
Another barrier to obtaining genetic testing is the lack of genetic counselors affiliated with neurology centers who can provide PD genetics education, assessment, and counseling. Even in specialized academic centers, it can be difficult to incorporate genetic counselors in PD neurology practice in the United States where 90% of patients are covered under Medicare.8 Genetic counselors are not recognized as Medicare providers and are unable to be reimbursed directly for their services. This is compounded by the ongoing genetic counselor shortage in the United States and globally.9
Specifically for clinical guidance, PD genetic status may inform disease progression and options for care.3 Most importantly, with gene variant–targeted clinical trials for PD expanding, knowing genetic status may qualify individuals for studies in which they may have interest in participating. As more people are tested, this may allow for increased and more rapid enrollment in clinical trials.
In this context, we launched the PD GENEration study (PD GENE) in 2019, which offers free genetic counseling and Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments–certified testing to PwP in a clinical setting. In this paper, we discuss the initial phase of the currently active clinical trial, the objective of which was to assess the feasibility of and interest in PD genetic testing. Feasibility goals were to enroll 600 participants within a year and to assess participant pre-test and post-test knowledge of PD genetics, satisfaction with genetic testing and counseling (demonstrating at least 80% overall participant satisfaction), and the impact of testing. In addition, we compared participant outcomes from test disclosure and genetic counseling between local providers who were predominantly movement disorder specialists, or centralized, certified genetic counselors with an expertise in PD, hypothesizing that with educational training and standardization of genetic counseling, outcomes between study arms would be similar.
Materials and Methods
Study design and participants
PD GENE is now an ongoing, multicenter observational registry trial (NCT04057794). The internal pilot exploratory study that we report here included an embedded 1:1 randomized parallel design with the aim to enroll 600 PwP. After a pre-test educational video watched before consenting, genetic testing and randomized post-test disclosure and genetic counseling were provided to all participants. The Clinical Trials Coordination Center (CTCC) at University of Rochester aided in coordination of study processes. Specific, detailed aims of the initial phase were as follows:
Primary outcomes:
1.
Feasibility to recruit 600 participants at pilot sites over a 1-year period
2.
Feasibility to provide satisfactory counseling based on 80% or greater of participants who are satisfied with the return of genetic test result and counseling (response to satisfaction questionnaire at 3 months)
3.
An evaluation of the impact of knowledge of genetic test results on participant behavior and approach to their clinical care and satisfaction in receiving test results, using questionnaires
4.
Comparison of differences in satisfaction and impact by provider (expert genetic counselor vs site clinician)
Secondary outcomes:
1.
The number of participants who receive genetic testing and subsequently are ready to enroll in a precision medicine trial
2.
The amount of time from first contact to return of results by clinician versus genetic counselor
Participants were enrolled from 7 Parkinson’s Foundation Centers of Excellence that were also sites of the Parkinson Study Group: Columbia University Medical Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Northwestern University, Park Nicollet Struthers Parkinson’s Center, University of Pennsylvania, University of Kansas Medical Center, and University of California San Diego. Participants were recruited from a variety of sources including clinician referrals, local advertisements by participating sites, advertisements on the Parkinson’s Foundation website, and social media.
The study was approved by a centralized and site institutional review board as well as the Scientific Review and Executive Committees of the Parkinson’s Study Group. The original study protocol is posted to the Parkinson’s Foundation website (see Supplemental Materials for reference). A modified protocol was approved following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic that allowed sites to conduct telemedicine baseline or genetic counseling visits to comply with state pandemic restrictions or participant preference. All patients signed either a written or electronic informed consent form before participating in the study. Participants were eligible if they were 18 years or older and met the Movement Disorder Society (MDS) Clinical Diagnostic Criteria for probable PD based on examination or chart review.10 Individuals with an atypical parkinsonian disorder were excluded. Eligible participants were English-speaking, able to provide informed consent based on cognitive screening, complete study activities, and were willing to undergo genetic testing and be informed of their results. Study protocols and recruitment guidance did not explicitly encourage or target enrichment of participants with factors demonstrated to be associated with genetic PD, for example, family history, age at onset, ancestry, and prior genetic test results.
Prescreening and pre-test education
Potential participants could enter the study by one of 2 ways, (1) by self-referral or (2) recruitment at a local study site. They either completed a prescreening questionnaire at the Parkinson’s Foundation website and were subsequently directed to contact a study site to initiate the enrollment process, or study sites could identify and screen their own established patients for eligibility. All participants were consented by site coordinators. Site coordinators provided eligible participants a link to a short educational video developed by the study genetic counselors (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UTufaBuhYes) to aid in the consent process, which covered basic information about general concepts in PD genetics as well as the scope and implications of the genetic test. A video script handout was available to participants who were unable to access the video. Participant questions that arose during the consenting process were answered by the site coordinator or a site investigator. A centralized remote genetic counselor was available to answer participant questions through a telephone consultation, if needed, though this was not consistently tracked.
Baseline visit
The baseline visit took place at one of the 7 participating study sites either in person or via telemedicine, depending on participant preferences and other restrictions. Questionnaires were administered to collect family history, demographics, comorbid conditions, medications, PD genetic knowledge, and Movement Disorder Society – Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS) Parts IB and II. Information about race, ethnicity, and ancestry was obtained to evaluate the diversity of the population recruited and evaluate specific high-risk populations who may be more likely to carry a gene variant. (Categories were based on the standards used for federal data on race and ethnicity.) The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) version 7.1 was also administered by study staff with MoCA certification. Site investigators with MDS-UPDRS certification performed MDS-UPDRS parts IA, III, and IV. When study visits were conducted by telemedicine, the MoCA form was administered to the participants at the visit to assess cognitive impairments (cutoff score of ≥24 used to qualify), and at the discretion of the site investigators, they were allowed to continue participating in the study. The MDS-UPDRS-III was limited to the items that could be scored remotely. Blood samples were collected for genetic testing at baseline in-person visits, and buccal swabs samples were obtained for testing during baseline telemedicine visits. Samples were coded and shipped the same day to the genetic testing laboratory.
Randomization and masking
A block randomization using R software (r-project.org) was done centrally by a statistician, using an electronic reporting form and was shared with each site. After written consent and after checking inclusion and exclusion criteria, coordinators assigned eligible patients in a 1:1 ratio to one of 2 arms in equal numbers: those participants who would receive results disclosure and genetic counseling at the local site (Study Arm A) versus at the remote centralized location (Study Arm B). It was not possible to mask participants and providers to the randomization because of the nature of the study. If sites did not randomize according to protocol, such as use of a local clinician, they were excluded in the analysis.
Genetic counseling
Disclosure of genetic test results with post-test genetic counseling was provided to all study participants. Providers providing test disclosure and genetic counseling were not blinded to any clinical details about the participant. Genetic counseling appointments were scheduled 6 to 8 weeks following the baseline visit. Genetic counseling was provided by a neurologist or a genetic counselor at the study site (Study Arm A), or by a remote, certified genetic counselor with PD expertise at a centralized genetic counseling center (Study Arm B). Genetic counseling visits performed through the study site were conducted through an in-person visit or remotely through a telephone or video visit (due to pandemic restrictions or participant preference). Genetic counseling visits performed through the centralized center at Indiana University School of Medicine were performed remotely, primarily through telephone (option for video counseling was added during the pandemic). Genetic counselors with specific expertise in PD genetic counseling were certified and licensed in all states where required. Neurologists disclosing results at the sites were movement disorder specialists.
Genetic testing
Genetic testing was performed at a Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments–certified laboratory (Fulgent Genetics) using next-generation sequencing and duplication and deletion analysis of 7 genes that are well established to be contributory to PD (SNCA [HGNC:11138], PRKN [HGNC:8607], PINK1 [HGNC:14581], PARK7 [HGNC:16369], LRRK2, GBA1, and VPS35[HGNC:13487]). This list was developed by the study steering committee after review of the literature (Kim & Alcalay 2017).11 Individual test reports were generated and shared with each participant. Variants that were classified by American College of Medical Genetics 2015 guidelines12 and the laboratory’s bio-informatic analysis as pathogenic or likely pathogenic were returned to participants. Variants of uncertain significance were not returned. One GBA1 variant that the laboratory classified as a risk allele, (NM_000157.4:c.1093G>A), historically known as E326K, was returned to participants because individuals with this variant may be eligible to participate in precision medicine studies for GBA1 PD (clinicaltrials.gov). Samples, deidentified (personal health data removed) and then coded for tracking, as well as raw exome data obtained from the next-generation sequencing platform were stored at the laboratory for future research as noted in the informed consent form.
Genetic counseling provider training
Genetic counseling training materials and tools were developed by the centralized site at I.U. for genetic counseling providers (physicians and genetic counselors) as an appendix to ensure consistency and standardization of genetic counseling (see Supplemental Materials). Genetic counseling providers were required to watch pre-recorded genetic counseling training modules developed by the centralized genetic counselors. An audio recording of a mock genetic counseling session was made available for training. A genetic counseling outline was created as a guide for providers to use during counseling and standardize the session. The genetic counseling outline listed the components of a session, including genetic educational information to review with participants and an emphasis on potential psychosocial aspects, such as family sharing of results and coping and adapting to test results.
Survey instruments
A group of neurologists, researchers, a patient representative, study coordinators, and genetic counselors with expertise in PD and PD genetics, selected and developed surveys to evaluate outcomes relating to the test disclosure and genetic counseling process (see Supplemental Materials). Preference was given to including validated survey instruments when possible. Note that the knowledge, satisfaction, and psychological impact surveys were chosen to explore Primary Outcome Measures #2 and #3. Genetic counseling outcomes were assessed before baseline and 4 weeks after the genetic counseling visit. Surveys were emailed to participants and data were collected using the REDCap system and later transitioned to a central database system. Participant knowledge was assessed through a survey at the baseline visit, following consent, and again following genetic counseling; questions for the knowledge survey were developed utilizing other PD knowledge surveys (Maloney et al, 2018; Falcone et al, 2012).13,14 The adapted knowledge survey had 7 true-false questions. For scoring, we used the total number of correct questions out of the total. A 7-item validated patient satisfaction survey (Zellerino et al, 2009)15 was distributed following the genetic counseling visit to evaluate participant satisfaction with genetic counseling. Three novel questions were added to assess participant satisfaction with the consent process. Each item was scored on a 5-point Likert scale, with higher scores representing greater satisfaction. Participants who answered a 4 or 5 on this scale (ie, “agree somewhat” or “agree strongly”) were defined as being satisfied. After completion of genetic counseling, providers completed a brief survey with novel questions that evaluated their satisfaction with the genetic counseling session. Provider satisfaction was defined as those who answered they were “satisfied” or “very satisfied” with the genetic counseling session (Q: How satisfied were you with the session?). The group of experts developed an impact survey that evaluated multiple outcomes following the testing and genetic counseling process. The impact survey included the Feelings About genomiC Testing Results (FACToR) questionnaire, a validated tool used to assess the psychological impact of genetic testing.16 The FACToR scale has 12 items, comprising 4 subscales: negative emotions, uncertainty, positive feelings, and privacy concerns. Two questions that mentioned disease prevention were modified slightly to fit with the lack of preventative therapies for PD. This scale was scored by summing each of the subscale scores (total score range from 0-48). Subscale scores ranged from 0 to 12 for the negative emotions and uncertainty subscales, 0 to 16 for the positive feelings subscale, and 0 to 8 for the privacy concerns subscale. Scores for the positive feelings subscale were reverse scored before summing to the total score. (Higher total FACToR and subscale scores reflect a greater and more adverse psychological response to genetic testing.) (None of the above surveys used for adaptation are copyrighted. See Supplemental Materials for adapted surveys.)
Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were conducted on R software. For continuous variables, such as age, we summarized them into mean and standard deviation (SD) in our report. For categorical variables, such as self-reported sex, we summarized them into the percentage of participants with a corresponding category (eg, female in self-reported sex) and the number of the participants over the total number of participants. Comparing between the groups of participants, we used Fisher’s exact test for the categorial variables and Wilcoxon rank sum test for the continuous variable with 2 tailed P values. Based on the sample sizes available for analyses, we expected to be able to detect an effect size of .27 (ie, satisfaction score differences of 0.7 points) at 85% power for continuous outcomes. The P value threshold for statistical significance was set at .05 to reflect the alternative hypothesis, which expected no differences in survey outcomes between the 2 study arms. However, after multiple test correction for 12 tests, the required P value for statistical significance was .004.
Results
During the pilot exploratory phase, the clinical sites consented and enrolled 620 participants in 16 months, from the start of enrollment on September 5, 2019 to January 4, 2021. Notably, a pandemic occurred during this time, leading to a pause in enrollment that lasted through the summer of 2020. Of those 620 individuals, 530 completed baseline visits, genetic testing, and were randomized for test disclosure and genetic counseling (Figure 1). Of the remaining 525 participants, 216 (41%) were self-reported as female; and of participants who reported race, 498 of 520 (96%) self-reported as non-Hispanic White, 10 (2%) reported as Asian, and 4 (1%) reported as Black; and 85% of participants had a college or advanced degree (Table 1). Twenty-three percent of the participants were of high-risk ancestry (Ashkenazi Jewish, Berber, or Basque), and 39% had a positive PD family history in first-degree relatives (Table 1). Reportable gene variants were found in 83 participants (16%) of the tests performed (Figure 2); this included 2% with 2 or more gene variants. For those who had 1 variant identified, GBA1 variants were the most frequently identified, followed by LRRK2 and PRKN (9%, 2%, and 2%, respectively).
The response rate to the survey was 73.7% (387 out of 525 tested and counseled participants) (Figure 1). Nonresponders were defined as those who did not answer the first and subsequent questions of the impact or satisfaction survey questions. There were no significant differences in demographic features, including test results of responders versus nonresponders to the survey, except for responders being more likely to be of late-onset and more likely to have higher education. Demographic features and test results of participants between study arms did not differ significantly (Table 1).
All 14 providers, who were required (both neurologists and genetic counselors at sites), completed educational training, a minimum of viewing the appendix and taped educational modules, and completion was monitored by the CTCC. The providers who provided test disclosure at the local sites included 8 movement disorder specialists (3 with formal or informal genetics training) and 1 genetic counselor newly hired from graduate school. Although specialists in their field, most reported limited experience with providing genetic test results disclosure and counseling for PD. Genetic counselors at the centralized site, 6 in total, had extensive experience, specifically with PD genetic counseling (average of 3 years). Providers for the pilot ranged in practice years from 1 to over 30 years, with most having 5 years or more of medical practice. All providers reported that most participants they counseled (75% or more) were new to care.
When comparing genetic counseling outcomes of study arms, participants were highly satisfied with the receipt of genetic test results and counseling in both arms; the overall satisfaction score regarding genetic testing and counseling provided was high; 89% reporting being satisfied, choosing a 4 or 5 on the Likert scale (Table 2). Knowledge scores at baseline were a mean of 6.44 (SD 0.83) and at follow-up 6.52 (SD 0.74). There were no significant differences in overall knowledge between centralized and site genetic counseling (Table 2). The total score on the FACToR survey was 12.5 (SD 6.1) and among subscales were 1.36 (SD 2.03) for negative feeling; 7.51 (4.08) for positive feeling; 2.05 (2.37) for uncertainty concerns; and 0.59 (1.3) for privacy concerns. Scores were not significantly different between study arms (Table 2).
Following the pandemic, in-person visits at local sites transitioned to mostly video conferencing. Although centralized counselors also transitioned to using videoconferencing following the pandemic, most sessions were done by telephone. It was observed that most participants (88%) were satisfied with the mode of genetic counseling that was provided—by telephone, video, or in-person—not preferring a different mode (Table 2).
Receiving a positive result did not affect overall satisfaction but was associated with a longer counseling session. Genetic counseling sessions in both arms lasted 15 to 30 minutes, on average, with sessions extending longer when provided by centralized genetic counselors (P < .003).
All 14 providers in the study who conducted genetic counseling sessions completed satisfaction surveys. Provider satisfaction regarding the quality of the sessions they provided was high, with 96% stating they were either satisfied or very satisfied with the session overall. Higher satisfaction was observed among site providers (P = 0.0183) (Table 2).
Discussion
This is the first study, using a randomized parallel design in the initial phase, to test the feasibility and impact of providing widespread genetic testing and genetic counseling to people with PD in the United States, utilizing local, specifically trained neurologists versus centralized, expert genetic counselors to provide test disclosure. Overall, the study demonstrated the feasibility of widespread genetic testing to PwP, feasibility of results disclosure by neurology specialists, and high satisfaction among both participants and their providers. Although some of the specific aims (Primary #1 and Secondary #2 outcomes) could not be met because of the interruption of the pandemic, the other stated objectives were achieved.
Several specific study features are highlighted. As noted, the coronavirus pandemic occurred shortly after launching the pilot study, requiring a pause in enrollment and modification and approval of the protocol for telemedicine. Nevertheless, the study was still able to recruit over 600 individuals across seven study sites in the United States within 16 months. There was minimal drop-out, and most enrollees completed baseline visits, testing, and counseling.
Additional data supporting the feasibility of this testing approach are the high satisfaction rates overall among both study participants and providers. A subsequent in-depth qualitative study of all pilot providers and their experiences further substantiates this (unpublished data); it was noted in provider interviews that case preparation and time were important to ensure quality of the counseling sessions and that they increasingly adapted sessions to match the concerns of participants. Individual genetic counseling sessions of local providers were of 15 to 30 minutes duration. Knowledge of participants was high at both baseline and continued at follow-up. Most individuals receiving test disclosure and counseling did not endorse different modes of delivery of services, remotely or in-person, suggesting flexibility in how these services can be provided at the local level. Note that we were not able to analyze differences between modes of service delivery because of small numbers for each model.
A central question of this study examined the participant perspective on receiving local return of results or receiving results from a centralized genetic counselor specializing in PD. As predicted, genetic counseling outcome measures for satisfaction, knowledge, and psychological impact did not significantly differ whether provided by local providers (Study Arm A) or centralized expert genetic counselors (Study Arm B). In fact, there was a slight trend toward more favorable participant outcomes in the local provider arm, especially as it related to feeling similar to a partner in care. This is despite participants often being new to care for the site provider. FACToR scores in this study were comparable to prior studies in different specialties, suggesting no major psychological adverse effects.16,  17,  18,  19 Of note, those who received positive genetic test results scored similarly in satisfaction to those with negative results. These outcomes are comparable to initial data reported by a large PD study evaluating return of targeted PD genetic results to research participants with PD.20
Our evidence suggests that clinicians without specific training in genetic counseling, but armed with PD genetics education and clinical experience, can satisfactorily disclose PD genetic test results and provide concomitant counseling to their patients. This study provides early initial data from the PD GENE study to support extending PD genetics services in North America via trained nongenetics clinicians. It is important to highlight that the early evidence from this study may not necessarily inform the provision of PD genetic testing and counseling services outside the United States, where health care models and infrastructure are different.
One can expect that comprehensive genetic testing programs can be labor and resource-intense, requiring a certain degree of infrastructure to support increased PD genetic testing and counseling. Furthermore, cost to participants (lack of insurance coverage/universal health care) in some countries, such as in the United States, can be a barrier to accessing genetic testing and counseling. To effectively carry out genetically targeted treatments or research programs for PD, it will be crucial to establish infrastructures in advance that enable accessible genetic testing and counseling for everyone. Importantly, as in other specialties, considerations of the scalability of genetic testing/counseling programs to reach minority, underserved communities are of utmost importance.
Some limitations of the study include the following: the unintended effect of a pandemic that affected delivery models and some of our outcome measures that may have skewed our results; however, if anything, its absence would have led to a shorter time to target enrollment. With the sample size used for data analysis, it is possible we missed small differences in outcomes between study arms. The mode of service delivery by local providers (in-person or video) could have skewed data toward more favorable outcomes; however, multiple studies and a systematic review suggest that delivery differences in genetic counseling are few.21 Other limitations were a homogenous and highly educated study population that will not be representative of all groups, local providers at academic centers who had previous experience with genetic testing, which may not be generalizable to other practice providers, and self-reported responses. In addition, we were limited in showing gain of knowledge of participants post-session when baseline scores were already high and an educational video, though basic, was provided before consent. In addition, the provision of free services and other aspects of a research initiative may have influenced satisfaction of participants. Strengths of the study are that we had an overall large sample size, high response rate to surveys, use of varied service delivery models representing post-pandemic medical care, and standardization of results disclosure and counseling provided (additional support of this is provided by unpublished qualitative data). In addition, oversight by the CTCC allowed for robust study execution.
Further research looking at more diverse populations to evaluate satisfaction (numbers in this study were too small to compare across self-reported race and ethnicities), as well as nonacademic, more varied providers could help verify the findings of this study, making them more universally applicable. In addition, for this model to be successful, we recognize the need for ongoing medical education in genetics and especially PD genetics. Ensuring the quality of counseling sessions is important for achieving desired session outcomes such as satisfaction and personal utility. A companion paper will be upcoming, from some of the coauthors, evaluating in more detail, the experiences, including lessons learned and challenges faced, of the study providers. Continuing medical education in genetics can help build confidence and expertise among providers caring for PwP.3,22 Our hope is that these initial data from the exploratory study inform beyond the PD GENE clinical trial to also provide guidance for PD genetic testing outside of the research setting. Enrollment is open for the expanded, observational registry trial with a focus on reaching rural, underserved populations across North America in their local settings.
Conclusion
In summary, the initial phase of the PD GENE clinical trial found that widespread PD genetic testing using an established gene panel, paired with genetic counseling, is feasible in a clinical setting utilizing local providers. We were able to achieve our target enrollment number within a reasonable period, 16 months, despite a pandemic. There were high levels of participant and provider satisfaction and no significant differences between study arms (local provider versus centralized expert genetic counselor) as related to patient knowledge, satisfaction, and psychological impact. Based on these encouraging results and ongoing interest among the PD community, enrollment is expanding.

