An accessible, relational, inclusive, and actionable (ARIA) model of genetic 
counseling compared with usual care: Results of a randomized controlled trial.

Introduction
Equitable access to genomic medicine requires new approaches to communicating genomic sequencing results to diverse populations. Both general health literacy and genomic literacy are low in the United States,1,2 obligating health professionals to find new ways to effectively communicate the implications of genomic sequencing information. Few genetic counseling communication interventions have been tested in randomized trials, and health literacy has rarely been tested as a moderator. Research on how health literacy affects communication about genetics and genomics is limited, although, research on genetic counseling communication provides evidence of patterns that prioritize scientific information often delivered at a high level of literacy.3,  4,  5,  6,  7 This educational model is highly likely to limit patient understanding.3,8,  9,  10 Some studies have noted genetic counseling does not adequately address the consequences of learning potentially threatening risk information11 or patients’ feelings about genetic risk.12 Tests measuring genetic counselors’ implicit bias have indicated that a pro-White bias minimizes exploration of the needs of Black and Hispanic patients, creating inequities in practice.13 These findings suggest an urgent need to adapt current genetic counseling using best practices in communication science, including strategies such as using plain language, emphasizing key messages, and checking for understanding.14
To address this need, we created a novel genetic counseling practice model called ARIA, which aims to make genetic counseling inclusive, by making the communication accessible, relational, and actionable.15 We developed this model iteratively by adapting effective communication methods to the genetic counseling context. The model is described in detail in Riddle et al;15 in brief, ARIA focuses on how genetic counseling is conducted, with the goal of making genomic information more accessible and meaningful to patients from historically underserved and socioeconomically diverse backgrounds (see Table 1, footnote c), particularly those with limited health literacy and English proficiency. ARIA deliberately incorporates evidence-based communication skills like plain language, teach back to check for understanding, and the use of frequencies to convey risk, as well as relationship-building strategies (eg, open-ended questions, slower pacing, providing only personally relevant information, and highlighting key messages) designed to make health communication accessible and inclusive to those of any literacy or numeracy level. ARIA aims to make genetic counseling more useful and meaningful to the increasingly diverse patients and research participants who have access to genomic testing.15
We implemented ARIA in the NIH Clinical Sequencing Evidence-Generating Research (CSER) consortium’s Cancer Health Assessments Reaching Many (CHARM) study.16 In this article, we report results from a randomized controlled trial comparing ARIA to usual care (UC) genetic counseling in the context of disclosing clinical exome-based panel testing results by telephone in CHARM.
Materials and Methods
Study design
The CSER consortium prioritized engagement of historically underrepresented populations in genomics research and clinical genetics.17 The overall goal of CHARM study was to streamline the genomic service process through a series of interventions to increase accessibility for a diverse adult patient population at risk for hereditary cancer.16 We conducted our trial as part of CHARM study and used qualitative interviews at 2 timepoints for evaluation (Figure 1).
Intervention
Genetic counselors implementing ARIA in CHARM study underwent in-depth training, including skills and practice exercises (described in detail elsewhere).15 UC counselors were instructed to practice as usual and received no training. The genetic counselors for both arms developed a single content checklist as a reference document for the genetic counseling sessions, which included contracting, family history, education (UC arm), primary results disclosure, additional findings disclosure, and conclusion (ARIA counselors had specific instructions not to do general genetics education but rather to tailor any education to the specific needs of the patient). All counselors also used a postvisit documentation checklist for research study specific tasks such as updating the tracking system to indicate completion of a visit or use of an interpreter. ARIA counselors also developed an informal reference to keep nearby during sessions, pulling content from their in-depth training, such as example teach backs, ways to discuss numeracy. Once the skills became more familiar, the counselors stopped using it.
Recruitment and randomization
CHARM study recruited English- and Spanish-speaking patients aged 18 to 49 years from Kaiser Permanente Northwest (KPNW), a health system serving Oregon and southwest Washington, and Denver Health, a safety net health system in Colorado.16 At KPNW, we focused on clinics with the highest proportion of patients from minoritized racial and ethnic groups and/or living in a census tract with low socioeconomic status and patients with a documented need for Spanish interpretation or an Electronic Medical Record indication of primary language of Spanish. At Denver Health, approximately 81% were publicly insured or uninsured, 69% were from minoritized racial and ethnic groups, and about 21% of the 18 to 49 year-old demographic spoke Spanish primarily or exclusively; on-site recruitment efforts focused on clinics with the highest proportion of Spanish-speaking patients. Patients who screened at risk for a hereditary cancer syndrome via an online family history collection tool or had limited family structure (< 2 female members living beyond age 45 on either side) or knowledge of family history were eligible.16,18,19 Pretest education was part of the consent process; no pretest genetic counseling was provided. Participants were tested for cancer risk variants and had the option to receive medically actionable additional findings and (for a subset) select carrier status results. Pathogenic/likely pathogenic (P/LP) findings were disclosed and, if associated with the reported personal or family history of cancer, variants of uncertain significance also were disclosed. Laboratory outcomes are reported elsewhere.20
Participants submitted a saliva sample for exome-based panel testing and were randomized at a 1:1 ratio using a computerized random number generator to either ARIA or UC genetic counseling for telephone return of results; they were not informed of the type of counseling they received. Randomization was stratified by site to ensure balance across those at KPNW and Denver Health assigned to each arm using permuted block sizes of 4, 6, and 8. The randomization list was generated by the biostatistician and then programed into a tracking database, which assigned participants once genetic testing results were received from the laboratory. Genetic counselors were assigned to a counseling mode for the duration of the trial (N = 4; 2 to each arm); the two involved in developing the trial were assigned to ARIA; the two assigned to UC joined the study team later.
Fidelity analysis
To assess fidelity to the ARIA intervention, we developed a coding schema to identify the presence of 15 elements reflecting the 3 key dimensions of ARIA: accessible, relational, and actionable (Supplemental Table 1). We then trained 3 research associates to code audio recordings of result disclosure sessions for these elements randomly chosen from both arms over the course of the study (ARIA: n = 39; UC: n = 42), 9 to 12 from each quarter over 7 quarters). Each element was coded as present vs not present, and thus, scores could range from 0 to 15.
To validate the coding schema, we asked 10 licensed genetic counselors to evaluate the degree of relevance of each of the 15 items to each ARIA dimension. The details of this process will be reported elsewhere.
Primary outcomes
Data were collected via baseline and postresult surveys; some missing demographic data were gathered from the electronic health record. The primary outcomes and associated ARIA dimensions were accuracy of recall (accessible), satisfaction with communication (relational), and perceived understanding of results (actionable).
Accuracy of recall
Patient recall of results was assessed in the postresult survey, 1 item for each type of result (cancer and additional results). Recall was considered accurate when patient responses were consistent with laboratory reported results. Each 1-item question had 4 answer options. For cancer results, patients with P/LP results recalling “My result was abnormal,” patients with variants of uncertain significance results recalling “My result was unclear” or “My result was normal,” and patients with negative results recalling “My result was normal” were all considered accurate. Recall was coded as inaccurate if the response was “I don’t know what my test result was.”
For additional results, those who opted to receive additional medically actionable findings, patients with P/LP results recalling “My result showed that I have a genetic health problem,” and patients with negative results recalling “My result did not show that I have a genetic health problem” were considered accurate. Recall was coded as inaccurate if the response was “I don’t know what my test result was” or “I did not choose to get this kind of result” (among patients who received additional findings) or when patients skipped the item. Patients who did not request and receive additional findings were excluded from the recall accuracy analysis.
Satisfaction with communication
This novel measure consisted of 4 items adapted from the Patient Assessment of Communication Effectiveness scale, 8 items developed by the CSER consortium21 related to participants’ overall satisfaction with the results and experience of results disclosures, and 6 items that focused on key elements of ARIA (eg, providing only relevant information, using plain language, building relationship) to enhance our ability to distinguish between ARIA and UC. Items were measured on a 5-point Likert scale (1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree). On the basis of principal-axis factor analyses using oblique rotation, we found the 3-factor solution (accounting for 62.5% of the variance in the items) to provide adequate simple structure with conceptually meaningful factors and thus, created subscale scores for each set of items (6 loaded on each factor): genetic counseling relationship score, communication difficulty score, and communication ease score (Cronbach’s αs of 0.93, 0.85, 0.77, respectively). The items and respective loadings are presented in Supplementary Table 2.
Perceived understanding of results
This novel 5-item measure asked, “Thinking about only your cancer genetic test result, please rate how strongly you agree or disagree with each of the following statements.” The 5 items were assessed on a 5-point Likert scale (1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree). A principal-axis factor analysis strongly supported a 1 factor solution (accounting for 65.4% of the variance in these items), providing evidence for structural validity, and a Cronbach’s α of 0.90, providing strong evidence for internal consistency. The items and respective loadings are presented in Supplemental Table 3. The scale was scored using the mean; thus, the possible scores can range from 1 to 5, with higher scores indicating greater understanding.
Secondary outcomes
Confidence in understanding of results (accessible)
This was a 1-item, global measure of perceived understanding, “How well do you understand your test results?” developed by the CSER consortium.21 This was measured on a 5-point Likert-type scale (1 = not at all to 5 = extremely).
Satisfaction with the amount of information (relational)
The CHARM team created this 5-item measure to assess perceptions of information quantity. The first 4 focused on (1) cancer result, (2) additional result, (3) likelihood of cancer in self or family, and (4) unclear results. The fifth item assessed the overall amount of information received. Response choices were “too much,” “about right,” “too little,” or “none received on that topic.” Participants choosing “about right” were considered satisfied.
Cancer genetic knowledge (actionable)
Cancer genetic knowledge (actionable) was ascertained using 2 items from the Rose et al22 scale that pertains to what was covered in the result visits to assess whether patients were aware that screening was still appropriate after testing and whether they misunderstood the genetic test as cancer screening. Patients were asked to agree or disagree with these statements: (1) “A person who does not have a cancer gene can still get cancer” and (2) “Genetic testing is used to find out whether or not you have cancer right now.” Choices were “No,” “Yes,” and “Don’t know.” A “Yes” response on the first item and a “No” response on the second item were classified as correct, all others (including missing) as incorrect. Patients responded to these items before and after genetic counseling.
Statistical analyses
Primary outcomes
To determine whether there was a difference between the ARIA and UC arms in recall accuracy about results (binary outcomes), we used Fisher exact test and Cramer’s V to measure effect size. For comparing arms on whether they differed on the 3 dimensions of satisfaction with communication (relationship, communication ease, and communication difficulty) and perceived understanding of results, we used t tests and Cohen’s d to express effect size in SD units. All inferential analyses were evaluated at a 2-tailed alpha level of 0.05.
Secondary outcomes
To determine whether the arms differed on the 1-item, global assessment of perceived understanding, we report the results of independent samples t tests and effect size as Cohen’s d because sensitivity analyses using nonparametric tests provided similar results. In comparing the arms on perceptions of whether the right amount of information was provided (binary outcome), we used Fisher exact test and Cramer’s V.
To determine whether there was a difference in the change between arms on the 2 cancer genetic knowledge items from baseline to postresult, we used multilevel logistic regression (generalized mixed model) to account for the dependence of repeated observations within a person. The independent variables included time (baseline vs postresults), arm (UC vs ARIA), and the product of time and arm. A significant product term would provide evidence that there was a difference in change over time. We also calculated estimated proportions representing the change within each arm as well as the difference in the change to represent the results as absolute values in addition to relative values (via odds ratios). We used all available data, and all participants retained their original assignment, thus this analysis reflects intent-to-treat. Any missing data were handled using direct maximum likelihood that is inherent in the calculation of multilevel models.
Moderator analyses
We explored whether the ARIA intervention was differentially effective based on health literacy, education, and whether there was an interpreter present at the counseling session. For all outcomes, this was accomplished by expanding the statistical model (multivariable logistic regression for the binary outcome of recall accuracy and linear regression for the continuous satisfaction with communication and perceived understanding outcomes) to include the moderator and the product of the moderator variable and arm as additional independent variables. A significant product term would suggest the presence of a subgroup/interaction effect. This would be followed up with plots of the model-derived means for various levels of the moderator (for continuous moderators such as health literacy, this would be low [–1 SD below the mean], medium [mean], and high [+1 SD above the mean] and for a categorical moderator such as interpreter, include all levels [eg, no vs yes] to understand the nature of the interaction).
Statistical power
For the primary outcome of cancer result accuracy, we had 80% power to detect a difference of at least 2.9% between the ARIA (n = 270) and UC (n = 288) arms using a Fisher exact test and assuming a 2-tailed alpha level of 0.05. For the primary outcome of additional result accuracy, we had 80% power to detect a difference of at least 8.4% between the ARIA (n = 238) and UC (n = 242) arms using a Fisher exact test and assuming a 2-tailed alpha level of 0.05. For the remainder of the primary outcomes that are all continuous, we had 80% power to detect a Cohen’s d as small as 0.24 between the ARIA (n = 266) and UC (n = 274) arms at a 2-tailed alpha level of 0.05.
Qualitative interviews
Qualitative interviews were conducted within 1 month of result disclosure (n = 33; 14 ARIA and 19 UC) and again at 6 months after result disclosure with a subset of these participants (n = 11; 5 ARIA and 6 UC). We oversampled for participants who received P/LP results (n = 17) and who were Spanish preferring (n = 10). Participants completed a telephone interview (45-60 minutes) and received a gift card.
To elucidate how and why the intervention worked or did not work, we explored topics such as perception of counseling communication, interest and ability to engage in the counseling process, and attitudes toward recommended care and follow up with providers. Those assigned to ARIA were asked about ARIA-specific communication strategies such as “teach back.” Interviews were audio recorded, transcribed verbatim, and analyzed using a grounded theory approach.23 Our research team collectively developed a codebook on the basis of initial review of the 1-month interview transcripts and further refined it with subsequent coding. Codes were added upon review of the 6-month interview transcripts to account for additional topics discussed, such as communication with family and cascade testing. Each transcript was coded by 2 researchers using Dedoose software (SocioCultural Research Consultants, LLC). Discrepancies were resolved through consensus. Data from 1-month and 6-month interviews were analyzed together using an iterative approach. We analyzed the data by arm, comparing the coded text for ARIA vs UC participants for a variety of codes and then focusing on the data by arm for codes specific to the genetic counseling communication, understanding of results, and health/genetic literacy to further elucidate the survey results. Coded data and emerging themes were discussed with the team to elucidate findings.
Results
Study population
Of the 827 patients with samples sequenced, 352 received results using ARIA and 344 received results using UC. A total of 65 patients received their negative results by mailed letter, 3 declined to receive results, and 63 were lost to follow up (Figure 1). Analyzed participants (n = 696) had a mean age of 36.4 (SD = 8.2) years, and 71% of them were female. Among them, 33.9% had low income, 26.3% reported food instability, and 15.1% said they preferred speaking Spanish. Nearly 20% had marginal or inadequate health literacy (BRIEF health literacy screening tool24 score < 17), 20% had a high school education or less, >33% had some post–high school education or an associate degree, and 39% had a bachelor’s degree or more. The sample was also diverse in terms of race and ethnicity (Table 1). ARIA visits were 2.5 minutes longer on average than UC.15
Fidelity analyses
The ARIA arm had a larger fidelity score (mean = 12.2, SD = 1.0) than UC arm (mean = 6.6, SD = 1.4; Cohen’s d = 4.7, P < .001).
Primary outcomes
Accuracy of recall was high in both arms, and we found no significant difference in accuracy of recall between the 2 arms for either cancer risk result or additional findings. There was also no significant difference between the arms on the perceived understanding of results scale. On the satisfaction with communication subscale, there was no significant difference between the arms on communication ease or communication difficulty; however, those in the ARIA arm had higher relationship scores (mean = 4.37, SD = 0.46) compared with those in the UC arm (mean = 4.29, SD = 0.53; mean difference = 0.09, 95% CI = 0.01-0.17, Cohen’s d = 0.18) (Table 2).
Secondary outcomes
There was no significant difference between the arms on the global perceived understanding of results (Table 2) and no significant difference in the change from baseline to follow-up cancer knowledge (Table 3).
Participants in the ARIA arm were more likely (87%) to report having the right amount of information on genomic results related to other health problems compared with UC participants (80%) (Cramer’s V = 0.09, Fisher exact P = .05). There were no other significant differences between the arms on any of the other items related to the amount of information (Supplemental Table 4).
Moderator analyses
Across the prespecified moderator analyses, we found two that provided statistically significant support for moderation. Health literacy moderated the effect of ARIA on communication difficulty (b = 0.07, 95% CI = 0.01-0.12, P = .01). On graphing the simple linear effects for each arm across low, moderate, and high literacy (Supplemental Figure 1), the advantage of ARIA increased as health literacy decreased. We also present the effect modification results on the basis of the presence of an interpreter on communication ease (b = 0.24, 95% CI > –0.01 to 0.48, P = .05). On graphing the simple linear effects for each arm across those with no interpreter (Supplemental Figure 2), ARIA participants reported higher communication ease than the UC participants when an interpreter was present; participants in both arms reported similar levels of communication ease when an interpreter was not present.
Qualitative interviews
Interview participant demographics reflected the overall CHARM study population, although, a higher proportion met the study criteria for underserved (Supplemental Table 5). Consistent with the survey findings, our interviews indicated that participants in both arms were highly satisfied; they appreciated that the genetic counselors moderated the pace of the session, providing opportunities to take notes, process the information, and ask questions, which they interpreted as a sign of care.
Although participants in both arms felt that the genetic counselors’ communication facilitated their overall understanding of the results, the interviews revealed some notable differences (Table 4). Those in the ARIA arm almost universally expressed that the information was presented clearly, reflecting the genetic counselors’ consistent implementation of plain language. In contrast, several participants in the UC arm were confused by complex, technical language and information that was not clearly relevant. In other instances, a combination of complex language and too much information made comprehension challenging. Despite having a medical interpreter, some Spanish-speaking participants in UC arm found the genetic counselors difficult to understand and felt overwhelmed by the amount of information conveyed. ARIA participants appreciated distinctive features of the model, including the consistent use of teach back, which they viewed as beneficial for clarifying misunderstandings and ensuring that they could share results with family. Similarly, the genetic counselors’ use of frequencies (eg, 8 out of 10) was viewed as particularly helpful for understanding their risk and implications for clinical follow up. In contrast, some in UC struggled to understand their risk when it was presented as a percentage or relative risk compared with normal risk.
The ARIA model emphasizes relationship-building by asking open-ended questions to elicit patient motivations and prior knowledge, adjusting for the patient’s health literacy level by mirroring their language. For example, asking patients early on about their decision to get the genetic test gave the genetic counselors an opportunity to assess their familiarity with genetics and tailor their counseling to the patient’s interests and needs.
ARIA counselors provided test results at the beginning of the session. ARIA participants did not feel overwhelmed when answering questions about their family history of cancer because by that point, they had received their test results and the ARIA counselors had explained why they would be asking about family history. In contrast, UC counselors reviewed family history first, provided some genetics education second, and then reviewed the test results. Several UC participants told us that they would have preferred to receive their test results before being asked the family history questions, which felt redundant with the pretest risk assessment and elicited feelings of fear, nervousness, and worry.
Our qualitative data, like the survey results, suggest that for participants with lower health literacy or who received results via a medical interpreter, ARIA worked better. In many cases, these participants had little or no familiarity with genetics, therefore, the emphasis on relationship rather than education provided a more comfortable introduction without technical language or an overload of information.
Discussion
ARIA is a novel genetic counseling model focusing on how genetic counseling is conducted. We found only 1 significant difference on our primary outcomes, on the relationship subscale of satisfaction with communication measure. There were no significant differences between the arms on the accuracy of results recall, perceived understanding, communication ease, or communication difficulty. There was also only 1 significant difference on our secondary outcomes, on the right amount of information on genomic results related to other health problems. For both, ARIA scored higher. There were no significant differences between the arms on global perceived understanding of results or change in knowledge. However, moderator analyses found that the advantage of ARIA increases as health literacy decreases and that ARIA participants reported higher communication ease than the UC participants when an interpreter was present. Despite finding no difference on most primary and secondary outcomes, the differences we did find were in critical components of the intervention (relationship-building and the amount of information provided) and for segments of the population for whom the intervention was originally designed (those with low health literacy and those who use a medical interpreter).
As in other studies of genetic counseling, we found that CHARM participants were highly satisfied with the genetic counselors and communication in both arms.25 We identified a significant difference between the ARIA and UC arms on the genetic counselor relationship subscale of the satisfaction with communication measure, in which ARIA participants reported higher satisfaction scores. This outcome may reflect the ways the ARIA model enhances the communication between genetic counselor and patient by using open-ended questions, slower pacing, providing only personally relevant information, highlighting key messages, and checking for understanding with teach back.15
Our qualitative interviews both confirmed the survey findings and enhanced our understanding of meaningful differences that may not have reached statistical significance in analyses of survey responses. Although both arms shared some elements, (revealing test results, asking about family history of cancer, and recommending next steps), the order of these elements seemed to matter. Deliberately and consistently engaging ARIA arm participants early by asking them to share why they decided to get testing and whether they had ever spoken with someone in genetics allowed the genetic counselors to use ARIA communication skills to tailor their counseling on the basis of the responses. Prior research has found that when patients are asked during contracting what they would like to get out of the genetic counseling appointment, they often don’t know what to answer because of their unfamiliarity with genetics and genetic counseling.3,26 To address this problem, the ARIA model approaches contracting and setting an agenda as an orientation, starting by describing what genetic counselors do.
Moderator analyses suggest that ARIA may lead to more effective communication than UC particularly for individuals of lower health literacy and those who use an interpreter. These findings are consistent with ARIA’s origins; the model was developed based on the research with a multilingual, low-literacy, and underserved population.3 The ARIA model includes specific training in how to identify and adapt to literacy level and how to assess patient knowledge at baseline and tailor accordingly. Importantly, our data indicate that ARIA also works well for those of higher health literacy. Following the universal precaution principle, which assumes that all patients may have difficulty comprehending health information,27 ARIA enables genetic counselors to adapt to those with higher literacy by mirroring the participant’s language.
The ARIA model teaches genetic counselors to briefly orient the interpreter before the session. Such orientation may help prepare interpreters, who often handle dozens of calls a day and may have little prior knowledge of genetics.28 Enhancing the effectiveness of interpreters is especially important given the shortage of genetic counselors who counsel in Spanish29 and the significant barrier of having limited English proficiency.30 Furthermore, specific elements of ARIA, such as the use of plain language, less information overall, and including only relevant information related to key take home messages, likely make it easier for an interpreter who is unfamiliar with clinical genetics and genomics-related terminology.
Limitations
The small number of genetic counselors disclosing results limits generalizability of the findings. One possible explanation for our failure to find a significant difference between UC and ARIA on key outcomes was the possible contamination between the 2 arms. Although the fidelity analysis showed that UC and ARIA were distinct, in reviewing appointment audio recordings, we identified some overlap between UC and ARIA. In particular, UC counselors may have used plain language more than is typical because of their knowledge of CHARM’s overall focus on making genomics accessible to individuals of low health literacy.16 UC counselors were involved in team discussions about tailoring the consent, the risk assessment tool, and other participant-facing materials for lower health literacy. In addition, the lack of significant findings for several outcomes may be related to the focused nature of genetic counseling in CHARM. Counseling in both arms was intended as a one-time result disclosure appointment to confirm family history information and make recommendations for the patient and family. Genetic counselors in CHARM did not have access to participant medical records; participants with significant findings were encouraged to follow up with both clinical genetic counseling and relevant specialty care within their health care system.
Conclusion
This study adds to the growing body of research on genetic counseling processes and outcomes,26,31 including numerous studies of streamlined models to provide scalable genetic counseling and services.16,32,  33,  34,  35 It provides evidence that an intervention designed to enhance the value of genetic counseling by focusing on communication skills to improve relationship-building, patient engagement, and comprehension can succeed with all patients and may be especially valuable for patients of lower health literacy and those who use a medical interpreter. The equity concerns that motivated the development of ARIA reflect the concerns of the broader genomics community. With increasing efforts to include diverse participants in genomic research,36 interventions such as ARIA that focus on enhancing genetic counselors’ communication skills are needed to ensure the provision of equitable care.



