LOw-VOLUME HIgH-INTENsITy INTERVAL TRAININg Vs CONTINUOUs AERObIC CyCLINg IN pATIENTs wITH CHRONIC HEART FAILURE: A pRAgMATIC RANDOMIsED CLINICAL TRIAL OF FEAsIbILITy ANDEFFECTIVENEss
INTRODUCTIONCurrent cardiac rehabilitation guidelines recommend between 1,000–2,000 kcal or 150–180 min per week of moderate inten-sity aerobic exercise (50–70% of peak oxygen uptake (VO2peak)  for  the  delivery  of  health  benefits  (1,  2).  Recent  reports  suggest  that  high-intensity  interval  training  (HIT),  eliciting  an isocaloric work volume to continuous moderate intensity aerobic exercise (CAT), is feasible, safe, and probably more effective than CAT for the improvement of VO2peak in patients with cardio-metabolic disease (3, 4). In contrast, no systematic differences were identified between HIT and CAT for cardio-metabolic  outcomes  of  glucose  and  lipid  metabolism,  body  weight or blood pressure (3, 4). The lack of an unequivocal evidence base for the benefits of HIT is such that it is not yet recommended in clinical practice.Although  no  universal  definition  exists  for  HIT,  it  is  understood  to  consist  of  short  bouts  of  exercise  exceeding  90%  of  VO2peak  interspersed  by  recovery  periods  of  no  or  very  low  intensity  activity  (<  40%  of  VO2peak)  (3–11).  The  utility  of  lower  volume  HIT  applications  in  rehabilitation  settings (< 200–250 kcal/session) (11), which may offer the potential to deliver benefits in a more time efficient manner (5–7, 11) remains unclear. Initial evaluations of low-volume HIT in the form of walking and cycling, 5 times a week for 3  weeks,  reported  it  to  be  safe  and  effective  in  delivering  stronger exercise stimuli, in a group of hospitalised patients with chronic heart failure (CHF) (5–7). HIT elicited similar improvements in exercise capacity compared with CAT whilst also reducing exercise-related cardiac stress. However, the short  duration  and  the  high  frequency  delivery  of  this  intervention  limits  its  generalizability  to  more  conventional  out-patient rehabilitation.physical  activities  (pA)  performed  at  higher  intensity  are  associated with higher levels of fitness and enhanced vagal autonomic control, when compared to moderate intensity pA levels in healthy individuals (12). High-intensity exercise has also been reported to improve cardiac autonomic regulation in patients with coronary artery disease (CAD), with changes in  VO2peak  positively  correlating  with  changes  in  heart  rate  variability (HRV) (13). This may indicate the potential of this more  intense  exercise  stimulus  to  effectively  elicit  greater  improvements  in  exercise  tolerance  and  cardiac  autonomic  control in patients with CHF, both of which have been reported to be powerful predictors of morbidity, mortality and health related quality of life (HRQoL) (14, 15). The benefits of exercise rehabilitation in the form of CAT in CHF are well established (15, 16). The current study therefore aimed to: (i) assess feasibility and tolerance of a low-volume HIT exercise protocol, delivered in an outpatient rehabilitation environment for people with CHF, and (ii) compare the rela-tive effectiveness of low-volume HIT and conventional CAT interventions on indices of physical fitness, cardiac autonomic control, functional capacity and HRQoL. we hypothesised that, in comparison to CAT, HIT would elicit greater adaptations in the primary outcome variable (VO2peak), as well as in a range of secondary outcome variables.
METHODsDesign and randomisationThis was a pragmatic pilot feasibility study with a 2-arm parallel inter-vention design. participants were randomly assigned (simple randomi-sation), to receive either 24 weeks of CAT or HIT. participants were recruited on a continuous basis but completion of baseline assessments always preceded randomisation to an exercise group. All assessments were repeated after 12 and 24 weeks of training. Investigators were unblinded to group assignment. Fig. 1 provides details of patient flow through the study phases.Setting and participantsRecruitment  followed  distribution  of  invitation  letters  and  public  advertisement. patients were considered for inclusion if they were adults over 18 years of age, had documented signs and symptoms of CHF with an ejection fraction (EF) < 45% and were in sinus rhythm. Exclusion criteria applied were diagnosis of diabetes, presence of pacemakers,  major  surgery  or  myocardial  infarction  within  the  previous 8 weeks. The study was performed in accordance with the Helsinki declaration and was approved by the North Staffordshire Local Scientific Merit and Ethical Committees and by the local Research & Development office. All  participants  were  informed  about  the  procedures  of  testing  and  training and any risks associated with these. All participants provided written informed consent. All authors meet the criteria for authorship.Outcomes assessmentsparticipants attended an outpatient rehabilitation gymnasium at North staffordshire University Hospital, Newcastle-under-Lyme, UK on two separate occasions lasting about 2 h each, at baseline and after 3 and 6 months, to complete a range of assessments. The conduct of assess-ments was standardised in order to minimise any potential effects of assessment-related  fatigue,  with  functional  capacity  tests  preceding incremental exercise tests, interspersed by sufficient resting periods during which participants completed all HRQoL questionnaires. Briefly, the assessments comprised: i)     peak and sub-maximal exercise capacity (VO2peak and VO2 at venti-latory threshold (VT) during ramp incremental cycle ergometry (15 watts/min) using gas exchange measurements (K4b2 COsMED, Rome,  Italy).VO2peak was defined as the highest value averaged over 30 s during the last stage of the incremental test and VT was determined using the V-slope method (2).ii)     Maximal short exercise capacity (MsEC) (maximum power output in watts) achieved during steep ramp cycle ergometry using 25 watt increments every 10 s as described by Meyer et al. (6).iii) Cardiac autonomic function using HRV measures obtained from a  continuous  3  channel  ECg  portable  Holter  device  worn  for  24  h  (Tracker,  Reynolds  Medical  Ltd,  Hertfordshire,  UK).  The  24-h  ambulatory  ECg  recordings  were  replayed  and  analysed  using commercially available software, (Pathfinder, Reynolds Medical Ltd) in order to eliminate any random non-sinus rhythm beats, noise and artifacts as described by Nolan et al. (14). Only recordings with > 80% of total recording time suitable for analysis were used. Time and Frequency domain measures of HRV were calculated (Triangular Index of a 24 h recording (TI24), standard deviation of all normal to normal intervals (sDNN), total power (Tot p24), low frequency (LF), high frequency (HF) expressed innormalised units and corresponding ratios reflecting balance of sympathetic and parasympathetic system activity during day and night). iv)   Functional capacity/limitations were assessed via the sit-to-stand 5 (sTs-5) and sit-to-stand 60 (sTs-60) tests as proxy indices of muscular power and endurance and the North staffordshire Royal Infirmary (NsRI) walk test (17), which consists of walking 50 m on flat ground, ascending and descending 22 steps and walking the same 50 m back, as fast as possible. v) Health related quality of life via the short-Form 36 (18) and the Minnesota  Living  with  Heart  Failure  (MLwHF)  questionnaires  (19). The score for sF-36 can range from 0–100%, with a higher percentage  indicating  better  total  quality  of  life.  The  MLwHF  score can range from 0–105 with higher scores indicating greater perception  of  severity  and  intrusiveness  of  heart  failure  related  symptoms.Exercise training interventions and managementpatients attended the rehabilitation gym for supervised exercise train-ing, 3 times a week for 24 weeks (72 planned sessions). patients in the CAT group cycled at an exercise intensity corresponding to 90% of their predetermined VT (corresponding to about 40–60% of VO2peak). Exercise  stimulus  progressed  from  3  separate  bouts  of  cycling  of  7–10 min in duration, to a single 40 min of continuous cycling bout by 5–6 months. patients in the HIT group, performed 2 ×   15 min bouts of cycling, comprising very low intensity active cycling phases of 1 min at 25–40 watts (equivalent to 20–30% of peak power output) followed by high intensity cycling for 30s at 50% of the maximum workload achieved during  the  MsEC  test  (equivalent  to  ~100%  of  peak  power  output  during incremental exercise test), adhering to a work:recovery ratio of 1:2. Individualised patient exercise prescriptions were stored, for retrieval  and  implementation,  on  a  programmable  electronic  cycle  ergometer (Lode Corival, groningen, The Netherlands). For every training session, total cycling time, loaded cycling time (warm  up,  cool  down  and  recovery  periods  excluded)  and  training  workload  (watts)  were  recorded,  as  well  as  Ratings  of  perceived  Exertion (RpE), HR and bp responses. Training RpEs, HRs and bps were recorded at the mid-point and again at the end of the prescribed cycling sessions for each patient. Data included in the current analy-sis reflect the mean of 3 sessions within a single week at baseline, and  after  12  and  24  weeks  of  training.  Energy  expenditure  (EE)  during  training  sessions  was  estimated  using  the  American  College  of  sports  Medicine’s  metabolic  calculation  formula  for  leg  cycling  (VO2 = (10.8 × watts × body  mass–1) + 7).  The  estimated  training  VO2(L.min–1)  was  then  converted  into  EE  (kcal/min)  by  multiplying  by  5   x   total number of cycling minutes. At 3 months, exercise prescriptions were adjusted accordingly to reflect new tolerance/exercise capacity levels.  All  exercise  sessions  were  supervised  by  an  appropriately  trained exercise physiologist and cardiac rehabilitation staff. An ap-propriately qualified clinical professional was always present during all incremental exercise tests. Statistical analysisData are presented as mean (sD) or median (min–max) where appro-priate. sample size estimations were based on VO2peak as the primary outcome. For experimental power at 80% for an intended 0.5 effect size at a 0.05 significance level, 17 patients were needed to complete both arms of the study. Comparison of physical and clinical characteristics between patient groups at baseline, was performed using independent sample t-tests or non parametric equivalents. Mixed Model Factorial Analysis of Covariance  with baseline VO2peak as a covariate was used to assess main effects of time and the interaction between modality of training and time. where time effects were present, within group comparisons were performed using paired t-test if data were normally distributed  or  wilcoxon  signed  rank  tests  if  otherwise.  In  addition,  we calculated bias corrected Hedge’s standardised effect sizes (Es) in  order  to  establish  the  extent  of  pre-post  HIT  intervention  differ-ence (effect) in comparison to CAT (viewed as the standard reference point). This was accomplished using an on-line spreadsheet resource (20). To allow comparisons between groups with no pre test equiva-lence “adjusted” Ess were calculated by subtracting the pre-Es from the post-Es (21). All statistical analyses were performed using IbM statistics 19 for windows. REsULTsTable  I  outlines  the  physical  and  clinical  characteristics  of  the groups at baseline and indicates that no statistically sig-nificant differences existed at study entry. Aetiology of CHF included: idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy, CAD and viral cardiomyopathy. Medications were optimised across the obser-vation period. From the CAT group, one patient had bisoprolol increased at 3 months and warfarin at 6 months and one patient was taken off statins and had ramipril increased at 3 months. In the HIT group, one patient had bisoprolol reduced, one was taken off ramipril, one had bisoprolol increased, with another started on diuretics at 3 months. At 6 months, one patient was started  on  statins  and  one  on  warfarin.  seventeen  patients  completed all requirements of the study and remained in the final analysis. Patients who did not complete the study were physically weaker, reported worse social functioning and per-ceived greater severity of CHF related symptoms at baseline (p <   0.05) (Table II).Exercise training progression and toleranceIn comparison to HIT, patients in CAT, exercised for longer (p <   0.01, F =   35.2), at lower relative power outputs (p < 0.01, F   =   20.5),  but  at  similar  levels  of  RpE  and  cardiovascular  stress  as  indicated  by  calculated  Rate  pressure  products  (Rpp  =   (sbp  ×   HR)/1000)  (Table  III).  Total  EE  per  session was significantly lower in the HIT group (p < 0.01,  F = 31.7) and  significantly  increased  over  time  (p < 0.01,  F = 108.9) (Table III). During  the  observation  period  there  was  one  episode  of  syncope during exercise (HIT) and one episode of what turned out to be an anxiety/panic attack (CAT). Two patients (CAT) although  very  keen  to  exercise,  could  not  tolerate  the  exer-cise prescription due to severe orthopaedic pain. On several occasions,  patients  attended  the  exercise  gym,  but  were  not  subsequently allowed to exercise due to presence of cardiac rhythm abnormalities (2 patients developed atrial fibrillation and  had  to  be  referred  to  a  specialist  for  re-evaluation),  bpinstability with symptoms, resting angina episodes, abnormal glucose  levels.  A  number  of  patients  were  diagnosed  with  additional  medical  conditions  during  the  training  period. Although, some of these patients continued to attend the gym sporadically, maintenance of their exercise prescription could not be achieved so these patients were excluded from the final analysis. Patients included in the final analysis had completed at least 65 out of the planned 72 sessions.Peak and submaximal exercise capacityTable  IV  summarises  selected  indices  of  exercise  responses  at peak effort and at VT level. Over time, both groups signifi-cantly improved peak exercise capacity and tolerance indices (Table IV, Fig. 2). CAT, but not HIT, significantly improved VO2 and power output at VT at 3 and 6 months compared to baseline. This was achieved at a similar level of cardiovascular stress as indicated by unchanged RPP (Table IV). No signifi-cant interaction effects (group ×   time) were observed for any of  the  assessed  outcomes,  indicating  that  both  interventions  had similar impact on reported outcomes (Table IV and Fig.2). standardised Ess, adjusted for small sample sizes and for inequalities at baseline (Hedges bias corrected) indicate that the standardised difference in all assessment outcomes between the 2 groups, was always less than half a sD of the pooled sD. Cardiac autonomic functionTime  and  frequency  domain  HRV  indices  remained  un-changed at follow up assessment points. No significant time or group ×   time interactions were detected (Table V). Functional capacity and health related quality of lifeSelf reported NYHA symptom classification improved over time in the CAT group. Objectively-measured functional capac-ity improved over time in both groups (Table VI). Indices of HRQoL remained unchanged at follow-up assessment points. None of the 8 subcomponents that make up the total score for the sF-36 questionnaire (physical function, role physical, general health, mental health, social functioning, vitality, bodily pain, role emotional) and for the MLwHF questionnaire (physi-cal and emotional sub-scores) were significantly modified over time (data not shown). No significant group ×  time interactions were  detected  (Table  VI).  The  calculated  standardised  Ess  indicate that our interventions differed by less than half a sD of the pooled sD for all outcomes.DIsCUssIONOur  study  contributes  to  the  extremely  limited  knowledge  base for the potential use of low-volume HIT in the clinical rehabilitation of patients with CHF. Our findings indicate that: i) low-volume HIT cycling is feasible and well tolerated by patients with CHF, ii) HIT elicited a broadly similar degree of improvement in physical function as CAT, despite a signifi-cantly lower total training volume and exercise time commit-ment, that were accompanied by similar levels of perceived effort and cardiovascular stress, iii) neither intervention was effective in favourably modifying cardiac autonomic function nor in favourably modifying HRQoL. based on adjustment for baseline inequalities Ess, we con-sistently observed less than half a sD difference between the means of the 2 groups, for all exercise capacity indices, at the end  of  the  follow  up  period.  group  mean  VO2peak  improved  by 13% (sD 18.3%) and by 8.9% (sD 25.3%) from baseline, after 3 and 6 months in the CAT group. In comparison, the HIT group demonstrated a 15% (sD 15%) and 21.6% (sD 31.2%) improvement after 3 and 6 months, respectively. This level of improvement is in agreement with improvements ranging from 8 to 16% for CAT and ~18% for HIT, reported in other studies comparing HIT vs CAT (22, 23). In contrast, wilsøff et al. (8) and Tjønna et al. (24) reported increases in VO2peak of 35–46%, corresponding to a gain of 4–6 ml/kg/min in VO2peak following HIT, even though their HIT protocols were very similar to ones used in other studies reporting much less marked improvements (22, 23, 25, 26). A meta-analysis of exercise rehabilitation trials in people with CHF (16) concluded that on average, a 2.16 ml/kg/min increase in VO2peak is commonly observed. A meta-analysis on the efficacy of HIT applications in people with CV disease (3), reported that VO2peak was improved by at least 3.6 ml/kg/min. Myers et al. (27) observed that an increase in VO2peak by an equivalent amount (1 MET) is associated with 9% reduction in mortality over a year in people with CV conditions. In the context of these clinically important evaluation criteria, although both our  interventions  met  the  minimum  expected  mean  improve-ment (Table IV) they fell short of reaching the 1 MET level of improvement. A closer examination of individual responses and group trends (Table IV, Fig 2a), seem to suggest that HIT was associated with a continuous fashion of improvement for VO2peak, whereas CAT improvements seemed to have levelled off after 36 training sessions (Fig 2a). It is possible that the significantly higher  relative  workload  prescribed  during  HIT  training  (see  Table III), can improve tolerance of higher power outputs which in turn could sustain/enhance VO2peak gains. Conversely, if one considers the time pattern of adaptations at moderate levels of physiological demand (VT and functional capacity,  Tables  IV  and  VI),  CAT  seemed  to  produce  faster  adaptations, even though the overall adjusted Ess suggest no substantial difference between the groups at the end of the ob-servation period. Improvements at this level reflect an enhanced cardiovascular/metabolic efficiency in sustaining higher levels of energy demands. It is possible that the greater total volume of exercise achieved by CAT at 3 months (Table III), was the main driver for the faster adaptations at VT level. Time effects of CAT on O2-pulse (Table IV), that may suggest underlying improvements in stroke volume and/or O2 extraction ability, could  partially  explain  these  adaptations,  especially  in  the  absence of any substantial changes in HR and sbp (Rpp-VT) (28). Our results partially disagree with two studies (8, 29), that have reported greater improvements in VO2 at VT in pa-tients with CAD and CHF who followed HIT training (32% and 41%, respectively) compared to patients in CAT (9.5 and 26.2%  increases).  The  interventions  in  the  aforementioned  studies were designed to be isocaloric with an estimated (from information available in the literature) EE/week for the HIT prescription (walking at 80–90% VO2peak) of ~1,002 kcal vs 942 kcal for the CAT (50–60% VO2peak) programme. In contrast, our training regimens were not designed to be isocaloric, so our HIT prescription, elicited a significantly lower volume of exercise  compared  to  CAT  (Table  III).  Our  weekly  cycling  EE progressed from 436 kcal/week at baseline to 704.7 kcal/week by 12 weeks for CAT vs 531 to 588 kcal/week for HIT, inducing statistically similar increases in VO2-VT (CAT: 23.9% vs HIT:16.8%) (Fig. 2). These observations may indicate that there is a critical threshold of total volume of work (EE) that needs to be achieved before training stimuli become optimally effective in modifying metabolic and CV efficiency at moderate levels of exercise. In all other studies that have used similar isocaloric HIT and CAT training protocols (8, 9, 13, 22–26), achievement of higher EE was perhaps easier, as the exercise prescriptions combined high (80–95% VO2peak or HR max) and moderate intensity (60–70% of HR max or VO2peak) longer ex-ercise phases (2–4 min) of weight bearing physical activities. It may be unrealistic to expect this level of EE, during cycling in  particular,  in  typical  cardiac  rehabilitation  programmes.  Nevertheless, our lower volume HIT protocol was not worse than CAT in eliciting favourable adaptations. To our knowledge, only one other study that has examined the  effectiveness  of  a  HIT  protocol  vs  usual  care  in  people  with  CHF,  has  reported  functional  capacity  outcomes  (9).  Functional  capacity  outcomes  are  important,  as  they  can  represent outcomes more meaningful to patients and can ulti-mately translate into enhanced physical independence and QoL. Nilsson et al. (9) reported that a high-intensity dance circuit programme significantly improved distance walked over 6 min, by 58 m. In our study, gait speed improved in both groups by about 18.3% (sD 14) in CAT and by 13.4% (sD 24) in HIT, despite the mode of training being cycling. we also observed significant improvements over time in both groups, for tasks primarily reflecting leg muscular power and fatigue tolerance (sTs-5: CAT: 11 (sD 10%) vs HIT: 18 (sD 8.6%) and sTs-60:  CAT:11  (sD  12%)  vs  HIT:  26  (sD  37.7%).  Our  results  are encouraging as they indicate that whole body integrated physiological adaptations translated into similar levels of im-provement in the ability to perform common activities of daily living. In contrast, our patients’ perception of overall QoL did not substantially change in any group (Table VI). surprisingly, the  improvements  noted  in  objectively  measured  functional  capacity were not reflected in the relevant physical function sub-components of the questionnaires used (data not shown). In the study by Nilsson et al. (9), the significant improvement in walking capacity was accompanied by significant improve-ments in the MLwHF score in the exercise group. However, the exercise group started from a significantly higher baseline value (30) compared to the usual care group (23) and thus at the end both groups had very similar scores. Recent meta-analyses have suggested that QoL changes in patients with CHF, do not always parallel changes in physical function outcomes follow-ing exercise rehabilitation, with small or no changes reported for a variety of HRQoL measures (15, 16). Our patients had baseline  scores  similar  to  those  reported  elsewhere  (9,  31,  32) using the same assessment outcome and thus our data are within the expected range.Reduced HRV is considered a significant prognostic indi-cator of mortality in CHF (14). Aerobic exercise training of moderate intensity has been shown to have sympathoinhibitory effects in addition to pharmacotherapy (30, 32–38). Resistance based exercise training has also been reported to produce some favourable modification in indices of exercise performance but with no associated modulation of autonomic function (30, 34). Our results indicate that none of our exercise stimuli were effective in altering cardiac autonomic regulation. Data from our patients indicate an increased level of sympathetic activa-tion that persisted even at times during which a predominance of parasympathetic modulation would be expected (39) (see Table  VI,  LF/HF  night  vs  LF/HF  day).  It  is  also  worth  not-ing a declining trend in total p24, in the HIT group, which is an  index  of  total  amount  of  variability  in  the  regulation  of  HR over a 24-h period (39). These observations may reflect worsening of underlying medical conditions and the general health status over time, as many patients experienced several health  challenges  that  resulted  in  substantial  pauses  of  the  exercise training programme on occasions. It is also possible that the overall volume of work was not sufficient to provoke changes to, or override the medication effects on, these indices of cardiac autonomic regulation. Meyer et al. (5), whose train-ing protocol we have reproduced here, observed no changes in  resting  epinephrine  and  norepinephrine  levels  following  a 3 week training period in patients with CAD. On the other hand, Munk et al. (13) observed significant improvements in HRV indices in patients with CAD, following a 6 month high volume HIT training (> 900 kcal/week). Future studies should aim to evaluate different volumes of HIT training to establish a threshold of consistent effect on HRV outcomes in CHF.Study limitationsOne  could  argue  that  a  greater  number  of  participants  were  required to increase confidence in the observations made. Al-though the low completion numbers were disappointing, they reflected the high comorbidity burden of these patients that ultimately precipitated withdrawal from the study or delayed progression and adherence to the exercise protocols. In cases of  pauses  >  2  weeks  in  the  training  plan,  we  compensated  by offering more training sessions, so that every patient had accumulated  at  least  85%  of  planned  sessions.  These  draw-backs may of course have diluted the magnitude of potential improvements.  Moreover,  due  to  funding  limitations,  travel  reimbursement and blinding of the investigators to the interven-tions and assessments was not possible. Unblinded outcome assessment  can  potentially  introduce  bias  in  the  reported  data, although every effort was made to collect and analyse the data as objectively as possible. we feel however, that our investigative approach was acceptable, given that this was a pragmatic feasibility study and these are common experiences and occurrences within such patient groups in real-life clinical rehabilitation settings. In conclusion, our study shows favourable training adapta-tions in people with CHF following low-volume HIT training. Compared to CAT exercise and functional capacity adaptations were achieved against a background of significantly reduced training  time  and  total  volume  of  work,  with  similar  levels  of  perceived  exertion  and  haemodynamic  stress.  These  are  important observations that may allay some of the concerns regarding the use of HIT for people with pathophysiologically reduced exercise tolerance. Moreover, the potential value of our HIT approach may be in its utility for severely deconditioned and cachectic CHF patients where improvements in physical function are desired in the context of energy preservation and time efficiency.