Addition of magnesium sulfate to bupivacaine improves analgesic efficacy after tonsillectomy: A randomized trial and a CONSORT analysis
1. Introduction
Tonsillectomy is one of the most commonly performed procedures in otorhinolaryngology surgery in pediatric patients. Pain, laryngospasm, bleeding, nausea and vomiting are the main causes of morbidity. These agents stimulate nociceptors due to spasm of the pharyngeal muscles, which sends pain messages to the central nervous system via the glossopharyngeal and vagus fibers [1]. Pain is the result of disruption of mucosa and release of biochemical agents such as prostaglandins and histamine. Postoperative pain increases within first 3 days, and decreases gradually following 4 days [2]. Poorly controlled pain often leads to distress for both affected child and their family. It results in poor oral intake and leads to dehydration which may cause serious complications. This leads to the importance of developing effective multimodal analgesic strategies to improve pain control.

Acetaminophen is routinely used for management of post-tonsillectomy pain but monotherapy is often insufficient. NSAIDs (Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs) and opioids are also used with good results, however each present their own risk profiles and unique side effects [3].

Intraoperative local anesthetics have been shown to decrease pain scores post-tonsillectomy and decrease the consumption of morphine and other analgesic treatments [3]. Bupivacaine is a local anesthetic drug. It can be used by infiltration for the children undergoing adenotonsillectomy [4].

Magnesium sulphate alters the perception and duration of pain [5]. Suggested mechanisms underlying these antinociceptive effects include the inhibition of calcium influx, non-competitive antagonism of N-methyl-D-aspartate glutamate (NMDA) receptors, and the prevention of enhanced ligand-induced NMDA signaling in a state of hypomagnesemia [6], [7], [8], [9]. In addition, magnesium sulphate seems to attenuate or even prevent central sensitization after peripheral tissue injury because of inhibition of dorsal horn NMDA receptors [10], [11], [12], [13], [14]. Magnesium sulphate is also reported to induce bronchodilation which is valuable to achieve relaxation in acute bronchoconstriction [15].

However, to the best of our knowledge, co-administration of magnesium sulphate and bupivacaine locally after a tonsillectomy in children has not yet been investigated.

The main objective of this study was to compare the wound infiltration (peritonsillar fossa) of magnesium sulphate combined with bupivacaine, bupivacaine alone and saline solution on post-tonsillectomy pain in children. The accessory objectives were to evaluate the effect of magnesium sulphate infiltration on prevention of laryngospasm and occurrence nausea/vomiting.

2. Materials and methods
After local ethical committee approval (Habib Bourguiba Hospital, number 9/14) and obtaining written parental informed consent, a prospective randomized, double-blind study was conducted in our hospital, from 2019 to 2020.

Seventy-five children aged between 3 and 13 years were enrolled in this study. All patients were ASA (American Society of Anesthesiologists) physical status I or status II and were scheduled for elective tonsillectomy. Indication for tonsillectomy in this study was recurrent tonsillitis.

The criteria for exclusion were additional procedures other than tonsillectomy, psychiatric illness, patients who declined to participate, mental retardation, history of sensitivity to anesthesia or any other drugs used in this study, any medication during the last 24 h before surgery and chronic pain medication.

The main objective of our trial was to compare the wound infiltration (peritonsillar fossa) of magnesium sulphate combined with bupivacaine, bupivacaine alone and saline solution on post-tonsillectomy pain in children. The accessory objectives were to evaluate the effect of magnesium sulphate infiltration on prevention of laryngospasm and occurrence nausea/vomiting.

Children were fasted for 6 h for solids and 2 h for clear fluid. In the operating room: electrocardiography (ECG), non-invasive blood pressure, and pulse oximetry monitors were attached.

Anesthesia was induced with increasing concentrations of sevoflurane (1–8%) in oxygen using a face mask. The intravenous catheter was inserted. Anesthesia was induced with IV (intravenous) Rapifen 20 µg/kg and IV propofol 3 to 4 mg/kg. Atracurium bromide 0.5 mg/kg was given for muscle relaxation. The lungs were mechanically ventilated, after tracheal intubation with the pressure-controlled mode. Fluid deficit was calculated according to patients’ weights and replaced with Ringer's solution. All patients received 0.15 mg dexamethasone. Anesthesia was maintained with 1.5k to 2.5k sevoflurane and 50k nitrous oxide in oxygen at a total fresh gas flow of 2.0 L/min.

We used a standard surgical technique (sharp dissection with bi-polar cautery for hemostasis). After tonsillectomy, the drug was superficially infiltrated at the lower pole of the peritonsillar fossa, the upper pole, and between these two. Infiltration was performed with a straight 23-G needle. The study drug was prepared into the injector making totally 10 ml by the anesthesiologist who was not included in postoperative evaluation. Tonsillectomies and infiltrations were performed by the same surgeon.

The patients were randomly divided into 3 groups. Group 1 received solution contained only NaCl 0.9% (N = 24). Group 2 received solution contained 0.25% bupivacaine 1 mg/kg with maximal dose 20 mg (N = 25). Group 3 received solution contained 0.25% bupivacaine plus 5 mg/kg magnesium sulphate (MgSO4) (N = 26).

At the end of the operation, residual neuromuscular block was reversed with neostigmine 0.04 mg/kg and atropine 0.02 mg/kg, and the endotracheal tube was removed when respiration was regular and adequate in rate and depth.

None of the patients received additional analgesic during surgery. Heart rate (HR), systolic (SBP) and diastolic (DBP) arterial blood pressures, oxygen saturation (SpO2), and end-tidal CO2 (ET CO2) were monitored continuously during the procedure. All patients stayed at least 1 hour in the post-anesthesia care unit (PACU), independent of whether or not they had gained discharge criteria earlier.

The staff involved in the postoperative evaluation was unaware of the drug to which the patients were treated. The agitation level was assessed according to Aono et al. [16]. Pain scores were evaluated using a modified Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Pain Scale (mCHEOPS) [17] at 0th (immediately) and 30th minute after arrival to PACU and 1st,1st and 1/2,2th h, 5th, 8th, 11th, 14th,17th,20th and 23th hour in the ward during postoperative 24-h period. All patients received Paracetamol 15 mg/kg every six hours.

Subjects with postoperative mCHEOPS values of 5 and over were given 2 mg/kg tramadol hydrochloride IV for rescue analgesia. The time for the first request for postoperative analgesia, the number of patients who required supplemental analgesia and total number of analgesic interventions of each study group were recorded.

Adverse events such as laryngospasm, breathing difficulties, bleeding, postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) and hypotension were recorded.

Randomization was performed using a computer based random number generator in permutated blocks of varying sizes. A table containing the number of patients needed for this study was generated. Each line of the table was assigned to a letter: “A” for the NaCl 0.9% group, “B” for the bupivacaine group and “C” for bupivacaine plus MgSO4.

Data are expressed as mean _ SD or number of patients. Normal distribution of data was checked by the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test. mCHEOPS scores were analyzed using the ANOVA test (in case of normal distribution) or Kruskal–Wallis test (in case of non-normal distribution). The time to first use of postoperative analgesia was compared among groups using Kaplan–Meier survival analysis and the log-rank test. Categorical data were assessed by the Chi 2 test or Fisher's exact test as appropriate. Accordingly to the evolution for a better science supported by the European Annals of Otorhinolaryngology Head & neck Diseases, P level for significancy was set at the .005 level [18], [19], [20]. Statistical analyses were done using SPSS 17.0 software (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).

The CONSORT guideline was used for medical writing [21].

3. Results
3.1. Population
Seventy-five patients completed the study. The patients were randomly divided into 3 groups: group 1 (N = 24), group 2 (N = 25) and group 3 (N = 26). Patient characteristics and duration of surgery were comparable among the three groups (Table 1).
The main objective of our trial was to compare the wound infiltration (peritonsillar fossa) of magnesium sulphate combined with bupivacaine, bupivacaine alone and saline solution on post-tonsillectomy pain in children. The accessory objectives were to evaluate the effect of magnesium sulphate infiltration on prevention of laryngospasm and occurrence nausea/vomiting.

3.2. Post-tonsillectomy pain
The Score of level of agitation in PACU was recorded (Table 2). This score was lower in group 3 when compared to the group 2 and 1. The difference was statistically significant between the three groups (P = 0.001 between each group).mCHEOPS values during postoperative 24 h period were lower in group 2 than group 1 (P < 0.001). In addition, mCHEOPS values were lower in group 3 when compared to group 2 (P < 0.001) (Fig. 1).
HR values during postoperative 24 h period were lower in group 2 than group 1 (P < 0.001). In addition, HR values were lower in group 3 when compared to group 2 (P < 0.001) (Fig. 2).
Time to first analgesic administration was 37 + -82 min in group 1, 106 + -31 min in group 2 and 307 + -102 min in group 3 (P < 0.001 for the three groups).

The mean consumption of additional analgesic drug (tramadol) was around 214.42±50.83 mg in group 1, 98.4±46.07 mg +- in group 2 and 29.92±35.19 mg in group 3. This difference was statistically significant (P < 0.001 for the three groups) (Fig. 3).
3.3. Prevention of laryngospasm
Laryngospasm was occurred in four cases in group 1, two cases in group 2, and was not observed in group 3. These differences between groups were not statistically significant (P = 0.095).

3.4. Occurrence of PONV
The number of cases having PONV during postoperative 24 h period was 2 (8.3%), 2 (8%) and 4 (15.4%) for groups 1, 2 and 3, respectively. The difference of the incidence of PONV was not statistically significant (P = 0.628). No major complications such as severe bleeding, dehydration, or local toxicity were reported.

4. Discussion
The main limitation of our study was the small sample size. Prevention of laryngospasm and incidence of PONV could better be evaluated if the number of included patients was higher. Our study is monocentric and not multicentric. However, our results were encouraging and should stimulate the completion of a multicentric study to confirm the benefit of the adjunction of magnesium sulphate to bupivacaine on post-tonsillectomy pain relief. Although our results are significant at the P level of 0.005 desired by the European Annals of Otorhinolaryngology Head & neck Diseases [18], [19], [20], suggesting that there is less than 0.05% chance that the reduction in pain caused by the use of magnesium sulphate combined with bupivacaine, is not linked to the simple random. The small number of participants and the absence of sampling at this threshold do not allow to conclude with absolute certainty. In fact, the realization of a prospective multicentric study with a sampling of 50 patients in each arm is necessary to confirm our results.

The main objective of our trial was to compare the wound infiltration (peritonsillar fossa) of magnesium sulphate combined with bupivacaine, bupivacaine alone and saline solution on post-tonsillectomy pain in children. The accessory objectives were to evaluate the effect of magnesium sulphate infiltration on prevention of laryngospasm and occurrence nausea/vomiting.

This is the first prospective randomized study in literature at our knowledge that compare the effect of postoperative wound infiltration of bupivacaine and magnesium sulphate on post-tonsillectomy pain relief and the prevention of laryngospasm in children.

The main finding of our study is that addition of magnesium sulphate to bupivacaine infiltration has significantly decreased post tonsillectomy pain than bupivacaine alone. This was shown when using the agitation level score, monitoring HR values and mCHEOPS score.

Pain in children is notoriously difficult to assess. Because of the objective of our study which was the evaluation of postoperative pain for the first 24 h, we used mCHEOPS score. It is a valid and reliable method of assessing pain in children which was designed for use in the immediate postoperative period.

Bupivacaine is a local anesthetic drug belonging to the amino acid group. It has been used for 40 years with good results [22]. It reduces short and long-term (>24 h) pain relief in patients undergoing tonsillectomy [23] by blocking the sensory pathways which inhibited the release of the inflammatory factor, and thus preventing the nociceptive impulses [24]. Several studies investigated the effect of local bupivacaine for relief of post-tonsillectomy pain as well as the technique of administration. A systematic review and meta-analysis in 2008 suggested that local anesthetic reduces significantly post-tonsillectomy pain even if this effect was ‘moderate’. The authors recommended the use of topical local anesthetic on swabs rather than infiltration because it provides a similar level of analgesia without the potential adverse effects [25]. Haksever et al. [26] had the same conclusions when comparing pre-operative bupivacaine infiltration to topical bupivacaine. However, Stetler et al. [27] found, when comparing the different techniques of depositing bupivacaine, that post-tonsillectomy infiltration provided the best analgesia. The author in another prospective study found no severe complications when using the infiltration technique [28]. A more recent meta-analysis found that bupivacaine infiltration has significantly decreased postoperative analgesic requirement without increasing the risk of complications. The authors conclude that bupivacaine infiltration is very safe and an attractive means to decrease postoperative pain [29]. We did not encounter any serious complications in our study using the post tonsillectomy infiltration technique. Our results confirm that when the technique of infiltration is done properly, no major complications can be encountered.

The effects of magnesium sulphate on postoperative pain and opioid consumption have been extensively studied. It has been administrated via several routes, including oral, intravenous, intrathecal, and epidural. However, the results of studies are conflicting. Herroeder et al. [30] in a review of the literature showed that even if most studies showed a decreased postoperative requirements after magnesium sulphate supplementation, a systematic review in 2007 failed to provide beneficial effects [31]. To explain these inconsistencies in the literature, the author evokes differences in dose and onset of magnesium sulphate administration, type of magnesium sulphate salt, pain scores used, choice of population, standard baseline pain medication and anesthesia [30].

Few studies investigated the effect of magnesium sulphate on the relief of post-tonsillectomy pain. O’Flaherty et al. [32] showed no benefit from the addition of magnesium sulphate at the dose of 30 mg/kg intravenously alone or in association with ketamine before the start of the tonsillectomy. To explain their negative results, they stated that the dose of magnesium sulphate may have been insufficient. They hypothesized that using larger doses of magnesium sulphate (40 mg/kg), to increase significantly the magnesium sulphate concentration in the cerebrospinal fluid, might produce different results in the patients [32]. Benzon et al. [33] added to the protocol described by O’Flaherty et al. [32] a continuous infusion of magnesium sulphate at the dose of 10 mg/kg/h during the procedure. However, they did not find an important decrease in postoperative pain or opioid consumption. One of their recommendations was to use larger doses of magnesium sulphate in future studies [33]. Tugurl et al. [34] studied the effect of oral magnesium sulphate administration alone in adult patients at the dose of 365 g twice a day. They found that it enhances postoperative analgesia. However, they recommend using the magnesium sulphate with an analgesic drug to manage post-tonsillectomy pain [34]. In a systematic review and meta-analysis, Xie et al. [35] concluded that there is no statistically significant effect of perioperative use of magnesium sulphate in the postoperative pain control in children undergoing tonsillectomies. However, a recent (2018) meta-analysis showed that perioperative magnesium sulphate regardless of route may offer pain, agitation, and laryngospasm relief without adverse effects in pediatric tonsillectomy [36].

Karaaslan et al. [37] evaluated the effects of post tonsillectomy infiltration of magnesium sulphate plus levobupivacaine on the cessation of post-tonsillectomy pain. The authors found that the mixture had a better analgesia effect than levobupivacaine infiltration alone [37]. However, Sun et al. [38] found that pre-emptive peritonsillar infiltration of magnesium sulphate combined with ropivacaine could not improve analgesia for pediatric adenotonsillectomy compared with ropivacaine alone.

Rather than using intravenous high doses of magnesium sulphate in children with the risk of developing side effects, we opted for low doses of magnesium sulphate but administrated locally in the wound. This strategy was guided as for the Karaaslan study [37] by the lack of data about the use of magnesium sulphate in combination with local anesthetic agents in children undergoing tonsillectomy.

At our knowledge, we did not find any study in the literature investigating the effect of the combination of magnesium sulphate and bupivacaine infiltrated post operatively for post tonsillectomy pain relief in children.

The second finding of our study is that the combination of magnesium sulphate and bupivacaine has decreased the occurrence of laryngospasm in comparison with the group bupivacaine alone and the group saline solution alone, but the difference was not statistically significant. The incidence of laryngospasm after adenotonsillectomy is approximately 20% [39]. Xie et al. [35], in their systemic review, reported that magnesium sulphate seems has benefits in reducing emergence agitation incidence and laryngospasm. Karaaslan et al. [37] found that using post tonsillectomy infiltration of magnesium sulphate in combination with levopubivacaine decreased significantly the incidence of laryngospasm. But the dose of magnesium sulphate used by the authors was lower than that of previously studies and it was infiltrated locally. Karaaslan et al. [37] assumed that the prevention of laryngospasm may be related with the smooth muscle relaxation achieved by local applications. Our findings confirm that local magnesium sulphate infiltration may decrease the incidence of laryngospasm.

The last finding of our study is that the difference of the incidence of PONV was not statistically significant. This is in accordance with Karaaslan study [37]. Herroeder et al. [30] reported that intravenous injection of magnesium sulphate may be associated with minor side effects such as nausea. Further studies are needed to clarify the effect of magnesium sulphate on the incidence of PONV.

5. Conclusion
Our study showed that infiltration of local anesthetic is an effective, easy and safe method for postoperative pain relief. We demonstrate that relatively low doses of magnesium sulphate and bupivacaine have better analgesic effects compared with bupivacaine alone or placebo. Lesser medication for analgesia is required with the use of combination of magnesium sulphate and bupivacaine. However, the small number of participants and the absence of sampling at the P level of 0.005 do not allow to conclude with absolute certainty. The realization of a prospective multicentric study is necessary to confirm our results.