A randomised trial comparing the subjective outcomes following septoplasty with or without inferior turbinoplasty
1. Introduction
Nasal obstruction is a very frequent presenting symptom with which an otorhinolaryngologist is commonly confronted in daily clinical practice. Deviated nasal septum (DNS) is considered to be one of the most common causes of nasal obstruction. DNS towards one side is often observed with compensatory hypertrophy of the inferior turbinate on the contralateral side [1]. While some otorhinolaryngologists believe that hypertrophied inferior turbinates regress spontaneously after septoplasty, others argue that these changes involve bony structures as well as soft tissues, and therefore are not reversible per se [2]. As such, septoplasty is currently performed with or without turbinate reduction surgery.

However, the evidence on efficacy of inferior turbinate surgery as an adjunct to septoplasty is limited in the literature and those investigations addressing the issue suffer one or more of the following deficiencies: limited sample size [3], [4], [5], [6], retrospective design [7], [8], and short follow-up period [2], [5], [6], [9], [10]. The current study was undertaken to examine the clinical impact of inferior turbinoplasty during septoplasty on nasal obstruction treatment on a relatively large number of patients with functional nasal complaints using subjective assessments.

2. Material and methods
2.1. Settings and Participants
Between March 2010 and March 2018, two hundred and forty-two patients with chronic nasal obstruction were initially enrolled in the current double-blind, single-centre, randomised clinical trial. The study was undertaken at the otorhinolaryngology ward of Imam Hospital, a principal referral university hospital in northwest Iran. Eligible patients were adults aged = 18 years old, who had persistent chronic nasal obstruction due to unilateral DNS with a contralateral hypertrophied inferior turbinate.

The exclusion criteria comprised the presence of craniofacial malformation, nasal polyps or sinonasal polyposis, septal perforation, adenoid hypertrophy, nasal valve collapse, nasosinusal granulomatous disease, facial trauma, any psychiatric disorder, illiteracy, age greater than 65 years, history of head and neck cancer, radiation therapy to the head and neck, allergic rhinitis, acute and chronic rhino sinusitis, adenoid hypertrophy, previous rhinological surgery and any significant systemic disease. Pregnant women, HIV or HbsAg positive patients and those who underwent other Ear, Nose and Throat (ENT) operations concomitant to septal surgery (e.g. rhinoplasty and endoscopic sinus surgery) were excluded as well. Only subjects, in whom the indication for septoplasty was based on functional impairment of nasal breathing, were included in the present investigation.

All eligible subjects were apprised on the aims of the study and written informed consent was obtained from them before study enrolment. The research protocol was approved by the Ethics and Research Committee of the Urmia University of Medical Sciences. A detailed ENT examination was done on all the included participants. The diagnosis of DNS and turbinate hypertrophy was performed by an otorhinolaryngologist on the basis of anterior rhinoscopy and computed tomography imaging (CT scan) of the paranasal sinuses. A three-grade classification was used to categorise hypertrophy of the inferior turbinate [11]. The classification grades were as follows:
•
grade 1: if the inferior turbinate occupied less than half of the nasal cavity and no obvious nasal obstruction was observed;

•
grade 2: when hypertrophied inferior turbinate occupied more than 50% of the nasal cavity;

•
grade 3: if a complete occlusion of the nasal cavity occurred because of the severe enlargement of the inferior turbinate.


Only patients with grade 2 and 3 were included in the investigation due to lack of compensatory inferior turbinate hypertrophy in cases diagnosed with grade 1. However, 83 patients did not meet the inclusion criteria and were excluded from the study before randomisation (Fig. 1).
Patients were randomly allocated to septoplasty with or without inferior turbinoplasty. Randomisation sequence was created by a biostatistician not related to this trial with a 1/1 allocation and random block sizes of 4. The allocation sequence was concealed from research staff involved in enrolling and assessing patients. Envelopes containing pre-prepared randomisation labels were attached to the patients’ case records and were opened immediately before operation. All surgeries were performed by one surgeon (R. S), who was blinded to the patients’ scores and did not participate personally in the collection of the outcome measures.

2.2. Interventions
Septoplasty alone was performed on group A. All the surgeries were performed under general anaesthesia. The nasal mucosal decongestion was performed by packing xylometazoline (0.1%) soaked ribbon gauze. Septum was infiltrated using lignocaine (2%) with adrenaline (1/100,000). A septal incision was made at the caudal end of the septal cartilage and prolonged on the floor of the nasal cavity. Mucoperichondrial/mucoperiosteal flap was subsequently raised on one side only. Septal cartilage was separated from the vomer and ethmoid plate. Mucoperiosteal flap was elevated on the opposite side of septum. In order to realign the septal cartilage, maxillary crest was removed. The bony septum was corrected by removing the deformed portions, whereas the deformed cartilage was corrected by reshaping, scoring, morselising, shaving, and cross-hatching. In the next step, trans-septal sutures were applied to co-apt mucoperichondrial flaps. Finally, the nasal cavity was packed using Merocel pack, which has to be removed after 48 h.

Along with the septoplasty (above mentioned steps), patients randomised into group B had also undergone inferior turbinoplasty. The hypertrophied inferior turbinate side was infiltrated with lignocaine (2%) with adrenaline (1/100,000) after septoplasty procedure. Submucosal tunnel was dissected between the medial mucous and the bone of the inferior turbinate using scalpel blade no 15. Next, a third of the inferior turbinate mucosa and bone was resected. Lateral flap was developed and repositioned masking the bloody surface. Merocel nasal packs were used to control bleeding which were removed 48 h postoperatively.

2.3. Follow-up
Preoperative measurements and postoperative outcomes were blindly assessed by trained investigators. Follow-ups were scheduled at 6, 12, 24, and 48 months after surgeries (Fig. 1). In order to avoid follow-up loss, participants were contacted about the follow-up session. The questionnaires were delivered personally to those who could not make the appointment. One hundred and fifty nine patients met the eligibility criteria and randomised with 1/1 ratio between the study arms (i.e. 79 patients in group A and 80 in group B) (Fig. 1). There was one case of septal perforation and one case of secondary haemorrhage in group B that were excluded from the study. In addition, 13 individuals from group A and 7 patients from group B were excluded due to mortality (n = 2), contact changes (n = 4), and non-compliance to the follow-up process (n = 14). Thus, a total of one hundred and thirty-seven subjects were studied, consisting of 59 (43.1%) males and 78 (56.9%) females with the mean age of 35 years (Fig. 1).

2.4. Subjective evaluation of nasal obstruction symptoms
Nasal Obstruction Symptom Evaluation (NOSE) [12] and visual analog scale (VAS) [13] questionnaires were used to evaluate the subjective sensation of nasal obstruction. Scores were taken preoperatively as well as in the postoperative visits following operation. Preoperative evaluations were always performed one day before surgery. The NOSE questionnaire is a well-established scale in the subjective assessment of nasal obstruction. It consists of five questions (i.e. 1: nasal congestion or stuffiness, 2: nasal blockage or obstruction, 3: trouble breathing through the nose, 4: trouble sleeping, and 5: obstruction during exertion) which evaluate five different symptoms of nasal obstruction and are rated on a 5-point Likert scale (0 to 4) depending on the severity of symptom (0 = minimum severity and 4 = maximum severity). The total score thus ranges between 0 and 20. The total point is divided by 20 and multiplied by 100, to get a score, which is expressed as percentage. A higher percentage score implies more severe nasal obstruction. The VAS questionnaire was applied to assess the subjective perception of participants regarding nasal obstruction. Subjects were asked to score their present nasal obstruction in a continuous scale ranging from 0 = no obstruction to 10 = total obstruction. The final scores were converted to 0 to 100% obstruction. Only individuals who answered preoperative questionnaires and completed all four postoperative surveys were considered for final evaluation.

2.5. Statistical analysis
Shapiro–Wilk and Kolmogorov–Smirnov tests were used for the compatibility of normally distributed data. Student's t-test, paired t-test, and Chi2 test were used to analyse the data. The statistician who conducted the analysis was masked to the details of the trial. The statistics programs used for the analysis were GraphPad Prism version 7.01 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA) and SPSS version 17.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, USA). We set the significant threshold at P < 0.005 to increase the probability of accurate detection of differences [14], [15], [16].

3. Results
No major difference was observed between two groups in terms of demographic characteristics, preoperative nasal symptoms, and baseline subjective scores (Table 1).
Compared with preoperative values, mean NOSE scores were significantly reduced in both arms 6 months after surgery (Table 2). The relief of nasal obstruction (i.e. lower NOSE score) extended to the entire follow-up period in both groups. A marked amelioration of VAS score was also noted as early as the first follow-up visit (month 6) in the combination therapy arm of the study compared to the corresponding preoperative scores. This amelioration remained significant during the whole period of the study in this group of patients (i.e. septoplasty + turbinoplasty group) (Table 2). Patients in the septoplasty-only group also demonstrated statistically lower VAS scores at almost all follow-up points than their baseline values (Table 2). The only exception in this trend was seen at month 6 (P = 0.013).
Intergroup comparisons revealed a borderline significant (P = 0.006) reduction in the mean NOSE score as early as 6 months after surgery in cases allocated to septoplasty plus turbinoplasty group (group B) in comparison to the individuals randomised to the septoplasty alone arm (group A) (Table 2). This improvement continued to be significant throughout the whole study time (P < 0.001 for all comparisons) (Table 2, far right column). VAS score reduction was found to be more pronounced in the combined treatment group (group B) than in the septoplasty alone group (group A) at months 12, 24, and 48 (P < 0.001 for all). However, no marked difference was found between two groups at the first follow-up examination in terms of VAS score (P = 0.026) (Table 2, far right column).

The time course of average NOSE and VAS scores over the study period is displayed for both groups in Fig. 2. The mean NOSE scores showed a gradual significant reduction in group B over the period between the first (month 6) and second (month 12) (P = 0.001) postoperative follow-up evaluations (Fig. 2A). The symptomatic relief (lower NOSE score) was found to be continued in group B from the second (month 12) to the third (month 24) as well as from the third (month 24) follow-up visit up to the end of the study period (month 48); however the differences were non-significant at P < 0.005 level (Fig. 2A). On the other hand, the average NOSE scores did not change statistically in patients undergoing septoplasty-alone surgery (group A) between the 6th and 48th postoperative months (P > 0.005 for all comparisons). Even, a deterioration of subjective symptoms (higher NOSE score), albeit at a non-significant level, was detected in patients allocated to group A at the end of the study period when compared with the third (month 24) follow-up session (P = 0.054) (Fig. 2A). A similar trend was also seen for VAS scores in group A (Fig. 2B). This means that the mean VAS score maintained its steady but modest decline during the whole study period in patients who underwent combined surgery (Fig. 2B).
4. Discussion
The present investigation was conducted to compare the outcome of septoplasty with or without partial inferior turbinoplasty in treating nasal obstruction based on NOSE and VAS symptom scales by implementing a robust inclusion criterion. Obtained results strongly confirmed the advantages of combined intervention over septoplasty alone regarding nasal symptom improvement.

According to subjective scores, a significant symptomatic improvement was observed in patients undergoing septoplasty-alone surgery during the first 12 months of follow-up. The best subjective scores were recorded at month 12 among these cases. Subjective scores of patients allocated to septoplasty-alone arm remained static till the end of the second postoperative year. There was, however, a mild worsening of the nasal symptoms in septoplasty-alone group over the period between month 24 and month 48. Likewise, a marked amelioration in nasal obstruction (better NOSE and VAS scores) was observed among patients undergoing septoplasty with turbinoplasty as early as 6 months after intervention. However, unlike the septoplasty-alone group, subjective scores of the combination therapy group showed gradual improvements over the entire period of the study. In short, septoplasty plus turbinoplasty group showed an overall better outcome than septoplasty-alone group in terms of subjective scores at almost all postoperative evaluations.

The results of our investigation are in agreement with the majority of studies reported in the literature. Gandomi et al. [17] investigated postoperative symptoms in 86 young adults with septal deviation at three and six months after surgery by NOSE scale and found a statistically significant earlier symptomatic relief in patients undergoing additional turbinate manipulations in comparison to those who had septoplasty-alone surgery. Devseren et al. compared VAS scores between two groups of patients undergoing septoplasty with (n = 34) or without (n = 33) submucous resection of contralateral hypertrophied turbinate in a prospective study [10]. Although intranasal VAS scores decreased in both groups postoperatively, patients with combined intervention demonstrated more pronounced amelioration of subjective symptoms 6 months after surgery. In order to determine whether concomitant turbinate surgery is necessary while performing septoplasty, Jun et al. [18] conducted computed tomography in 20 patients with unilateral deviated nasal septum to measure multiple anatomical parameters of sinuses, including the projection angle of the conchal bone, the thickness of the mucosa, the thickness of conchal bone, the volume of the inferior turbinate, and the distances between the conchal bone and the lateral as well as the median nasal lines. Since the average volume of the inferior turbinate was found to be significantly greater on the concave side, it was concluded that concomitant inferior turbinate surgery is a valuable complement to septoplasty surgery. In a prospective study, Kumar et al. [2] evaluated the symptomatic improvement of nasal symptoms in two groups of patients, who were followed up for a minimum of 6 months after septoplasty with or without partial inferior turbinectomy. Subjective assessment of symptoms measured by NOSE scale showed that partial inferior turbinectomy with septoplasty was more effective modality than septoplasty-alone surgery for the treatment of nasal obstruction in patients with deviated nasal septum. Similar results were obtained by Nasal Health Survey scores in a prospective non-randomised longitudinal study performed on 40 patients presenting with septal deviation who underwent septoplasty with or without inferior turbinate reduction [3]. Further support for the combined operation comes in a systematic meta-analysis, performed by Leong et al. [19]. They reviewed eleven studies, which had investigated inferior turbinate surgery outcomes in a total of 730 patients under 17 years of age suffering from chronic nasal congestion and concluded that inferior turbinate surgery is a rational form of therapy particularly in patients suffering with allergic rhinitis or obstructive sleep apnoea [19]. It has also been demonstrated that the need for revision nasal surgery was significantly lesser in patients treated with the combined procedure than those treated with septoplasty-alone surgery [8]. There are even histopathological studies in the literature, which advocate the necessity of inferior turbinate surgery at the time of septoplasty [20], [21].

Our results are also in accordance with the findings of previous investigations in the way that the symptom relief rate gradually diminishes over time in patients undergoing septoplasty-alone surgery. In a prospective study, Valsamidis et al. [22] found that 90% of the patients with nasal obstruction experienced a significant subjective improvement in symptoms after nasal septoplasty according to NOSE scale. Three years after the operation however, the rate of patients who were free from the symptoms of nasal obstruction declined to 75%. In their prospective study, Jessen et al. [23] found that while half (51%) of their septoplasty patients were subjectively free from obstruction at the end of the 9th month of surgery, only 26% of the studied cases were symptom-free 9 years postoperatively. In a retrospective study, Sundh and Sunnergren [24] analysed postoperative short- and long-term symptom relief in 111 patients undergoing septoplasty, using a questionnaire based on the Swedish National Quality Registry for Septoplasty. More than half (53%) of the investigated patients reported that their symptoms either remained or had worsened 34 to 70 months after surgery. At the same postoperative time intervals, 83% of patients were still suffering from nasal obstruction [24].

In contrast to our findings, there are studies, which failed to detect any significant difference between septoplasty-alone surgery and septoplasty with concurrent inferior turbinate reduction regarding subjective [25], [26] or both subjective and objective postoperative outcomes [5], [6], [27]. In 1997, in one of the pioneering studies conducted on this subject, Illum investigated the acoustic rhinometric data and satisfaction level of 37 patients, who had undergone either septoplasty-only or septoplasty plus turbinoplasty surgery 5 years earlier [27]. No influence of supplementary inferior turbinoplasty was detected between two groups of patients either for subjective or for objective measurements [27]. There was no significant difference in subjective or objective clinical outcome between patients undergoing septoplasty with or without contralateral turbinectomy 8 weeks after operation in the study of Nunez et al. [6]. Lavinsky-Wolff et al., in a prospective investigation, followed up 50 subjects with septal deviation, who had been randomly allocated to be treated with rhinoseptoplasty with or without supplementary inferior turbinate reduction through submucosal diathermy [5]. There was no difference between patients in either arm of the study after three months in terms of subjective (i.e. NOSE score), VAS score, Rhinoplasty Outcome Evaluation (ROE) scale score, and general quality-of-life instruments (WHOQOL-bref score) as well as objective (i.e. acoustic rhinometry measurements) outcome measures [5]. In 2007, Harrill et al. also failed to establish a significant difference regarding NOSE score 6 months after the operation between patients who had undergone septoplasty combined with or without bilateral radiofrequency inferior turbinate reduction [25]. Similar results were also observed by Stewart et al. for septoplasty with or without partial turbinectomy [26].

Such controversial results could be attributed to a variety of factors, such as differences in the study design, sample size, follow-up length, surgical techniques used for inferior turbinate reduction, subjective measurement questionnaires, the statistical threshold applied for data evaluation, and the severity of the abnormality (i.e. laterality and extent of inferior turbinate hypertrophy). Besides, multiple effective parameters have already been identified by prior studies that can influence the patients’ subjective satisfaction after septal surgery [22], [28], [29], [30], [31], [32]. These parameters comprise a wide variety of variables ranging from patient demographics and comorbidities to symptom severity and even emotional factors. Therefore, strict exclusion criteria were applied in the present research work to reduce the impact of confounding factors, as far as possible. Since chronic rhinitis and rhinosinusitis were found to be associated with lower satisfaction scores after surgery [17], [26], [30], [32], [33], patients with these conditions were excluded from the analysis. Individuals with bilateral turbinate hypertrophy were not included in analysis, because the purpose of this research project was to investigate only patients with compensatory inferior turbinate enlargement. We also excluded patients with other head-and-neck diseases or with other concurrent surgical procedures (Fig. 1) to reduce their confounding effects. Since mild enlargement of inferior turbinate causes no obvious nasal obstruction, only subjects with hypertrophied inferior turbinate, occupying more than 50% of the nasal cavity, were recruited. In this way, a more homogeneous population was selected, which in turn enhances the ability to detect statistically different outcomes according to surgery allocation. In fact, there are some evidences in the literature suggesting that more strict criteria of selecting cases may affect the surgical outcome of inferior turbinate reduction. Farmer et al. [34] reported that the greatest benefit of submucosal diathermy to the inferior turbinates was observed in patients with lower preoperative nasal conductance of airflow following Coblation surgery. Yilmaz et al. [35] noted that the efficacy of radiofrequency volumetric tissue reduction markedly depends on the degree of patients’ turbinates response to preoperative topical vasoconstrictor drop test. Besides, the French Society of ENT recently published guidelines for nasal surgery completion, stressing the need for vigorous patient selection [36]. We even considered illiteracy and the presence of psychiatric disorder history as an exclusion criterion to ensure that the patient has a sufficient level of understanding and respects the postoperative recommendations and follow-up visits. All eligible subjects were thoroughly apprised on the aims of the investigation and were informed of benefits of their participation. High follow-up rate in our series indicates that the eligibility of patients was sufficiently considered in this regard as well.

Turbinoplasty is an invasive and extensive procedure, and therefore increases the risk of hemorrhage. French Otorhinolaryngology Society guidelines have recommended those surgical techniques that minimise haemorrhage risk [36]. The only patient with postoperative haemorrhage was observed in our combination therapy group. Hemorrhagic complications were reported in 0–7% of cases undergoing septal surgery [37], [38], [39]. Our rate of 1.2% (one case out of 80 who were initially allocated to the combined treatment group) is at the low end of that range. Anyway, as it was stipulated by de Gabory et al. [36], ambulatory turbinoplasty surgery should not be proposed to individuals with haemostatic disorder. There is also a great deal of controversy in the literature regarding the suitability of septoplasty surgery for day surgery [7]. These controversies are mainly caused by the re-admission rates associated with outpatient septoplasty, ranging in research works from 2% to 13.4% [40], [41], [42], [43]. Published guidelines from the Royal College of Surgeons of England recommend that the unexpected admission rate should be 2–3% for the day-case septal surgery [44]. Aside from one case which developed secondary haemorrhage, there was one patient in our combination therapy group who suffered septal perforation after surgery, bringing the overall re-admission rate to 2.5%. This is within the range suggested by the Royal College of Surgeons of England.

Apart from the robust exclusion criteria, the current investigation has other strengths as well, including prospective design, long follow-up period (4 years), a low threshold for statistical significance (at P < 0.005), and high follow-up rate (> 86%). In addition, all surgeries were performed by the same surgeon who was unaware of group assignment and was not personally involved in collecting the follow-up data, thus minimising the possibility of bias at that level. However, this research work suffers from a number of limitations. First of all, this is a single-centre, highly selective study in one large, busy urban hospital, and thus the results should be interpreted with caution. Secondly, adherence to our rigid exclusion criteria diminished the number of eligible participants, which ultimately reduces the power of the statistical analysis. Thirdly, no objective evaluation was achieved in this study and the findings are solely based on subjective measurements, which are liable to reporting bias, and are highly personality-dependent. However, this is inherent to any subjective assessment. Thus, our findings require further confirmation by objective outcome measures in large-scale, multi-centre studies.

5. Conclusion
According to our findings, although both septoplasty-alone and septoplasty accompanied with compensatory turbinoplasty successfully relieved the patient complaint of nasal obstruction at all postoperative visits compared with the baseline measurements, the symptomatic improvement was more pronounced in patients undergoing the combined procedure. A statistically significant difference was observed between two groups of patients in almost every follow-up visit. Seemingly, a turbinate reduction surgery should be conducted along with septoplasty to achieve better results in cases suffering from deviated nasal septum with hypertrophied inferior turbinate.