Local budesonide therapy in the management of persistent hyposmia in suspected 
non-severe COVID-19 patients: Results of a randomized controlled trial.

Introduction
In addition to fever and respiratory symptoms, hyposmia and anosmia (olfactory loss) were considered as symptoms of COVID-19 at the start of the pandemic [1, 2, 3, 4]. These symptoms have various causes and are considered as an impairment of the olfactory system, which includes olfactory receptors present in the nasal cavity mucosa. When odorants come into contact with these receptors, signals are transmitted to the brain through the olfactory nerve, enabling the perception of smells. COVID-19 and other viral infections such as influenza damage olfactory cells or disrupt the transmission pathways of olfactory signals similar to the impairment caused by head injuries, tumors, inflammatory diseases, and neurological disorders. In some cases, olfactory loss can be temporary with spontaneous recovery occurring within the first few months following an incident. However, for some individual's anosmia can be permanent and can have a significant impact on quality of life by affecting the ability to detect odors, taste food, and perceive dangers associated with potentially harmful odors.
In literature, post-viral hyposmia is generally described as having long-term impacts on quality of life. Following a COVID-19 infection, prognosis of olfactory disorders varies from individual to individual. For most people with post-COVID anosmia, recovery of olfactory function generally occurs within a few months after infection. However, for some individuals, olfactory disturbances may persist for longer periods or become permanent. Moreover, olfactory recovery can also be uneven with reduced sensitivity or alterations in odor perception [[5],[6].
The usual treatment of post-viral hyposmia is based on topical or systemic corticosteroid therapy combined with physiological saline nasal irrigation beginning as soon as any signs appear [7, 8, 9]. In 2020, the French association of ear, nose, and throat specialists advised against corticosteroid therapy and nasal irrigation because the severity of the SARS-CoV-2 virus was unknown at the time [[10],[11]. However, it was found that the virus generally presents itself in the nasal cavity for 20 days on average and that persistent hyposmia after 30 days may be due to inflammatory or neurological damage [[12]]. Therefore, local treatment with corticosteroids was started after the onset of symptoms of COVID-19 without the risk of dissemination after 30 days. In persistent hyposmia the only effective treatment was considered to be budesonide nasal irrigation combined with olfactory rehabilitation [[13]].
Thectionn of budesonide in post-viral anosmia is based on its anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory properties. During a COVID-19 infection, the olfactory clefts can experience edema that may contribute to the early loss of smell. Budesonide acts by reducing this edema, which may help restore olfactory function. In addition to its anti-inflammatory effects, it could also facilitate the recovery of damaged olfactory cells in olfactory mucosa. This helps to decrease physical barriers blocking the transmission of olfactory signals and may contribute to the improvement of hyposmia.
Budesonide does not currently have market authorization for this purpose and has not been employed as a routine treatment in France. Therefore, the only way to test this treatment was to conduct a dedicated clinical trial. The aim of this study was to assess the efficacy of local intranasal treatment with budesonide nasal irrigation in addition to olfactory rehabilitation in the management of olfactory dysfunction in COVID-19 patients without signs of severity and with persistent hyposmia 30 days after the onset of symptoms.
Methods
A two center, open-label, two-arm parallel group, randomized, controlled, superiority trial was conducted at the Aldolphe de Rothschild Foundation Hospital and Lariboisière Hospital in Paris, France. The experimental group (EG) received nasal irrigation with budesonide and physiological saline (budesonide 1 mg/2 ml diluted in 250 mL of physiological saline [0.09%]) by way of three 20 ml syringes in each nasal cavity in the morning and evening for 30 days in addition to olfactory rehabilitation practiced twice a day. The control group (CG) received similar irrigations, but without budesonide.
We used a validated test (ODORATEST) to determine the olfactory threshold for five pure, easily-recognizable odorants [[14],[15]. These five odorants were categorized through Smell 5. Phenylethyl alcohol (Smell 1) evoked the scent of roses/flowers. Gamma1 decalactone (Smell 2) evoked the scent of caramel or baked goods, whereas Smell 3 (isovaleric acid) evoked the scent of perspiration or goat cheese. Cyclotene (Smell 4) evoked the scent of apricots or peaches, and lastly scatole (Smell 5) evoked the scent of a barn or liquid manure. All odorants were familiar smells; three of which were chosen as “pleasant” and two as “unpleasant”. Each substance was presented in eight concentration levels according to a logarithm with each level differing from the next by a factor of 10 so as to cover the full range of human olfactory acuity. The test was computer controlled for the random presentation of stimuli and data acquisition, and involved learning smells, handling bottles, and a keyboard. Before a test, a nurse explained the test procedures to the patients and each patient was additionally provided with instructions to follow on the computer.
Olfactory rehabilitation practices using commercially available aromatic scents of vanilla, clove, vinegar, curry, cinnamon and thyme were performed in the morning and evening before meals. Patients were asked to look at the name of each aroma sample, open the bottles, smell the contents of each bottle for 15 seconds, wait for 15 seconds and then move on to the next sample.
Patients were included if they had an isolated sudden onset of hyposmia persisting 30 days after the onset of symptoms of a CoV-2 SARS infection, and were: (i) older than 18 years, (ii) with a suspected SARS-CoV-2 infection (whether confirmed by a polymerase chain reaction [PCR] test or not), having been in close contact with a PCR confirmed person or having undergone a primary typical chest computed tomography scan showing unsystematic frosted glass patches with predominantly sub-pleural appearance, and at a later stage, alveolar condensation (without excavation or nodules) or masses with positive serology results. All included patients were affiliated with or a beneficiary of a social medical insurance plan and were required to provide written consent to participate in the study. Exclusion criteria consisted of: (i) known hypersensitivity to budesonide or any of the excipients, (ii) hemostasis disorder or epistaxis, oral-nasal and/or ophthalmic herpes virus infection, (iii) long-term corticosteroid treatment, (iv) treatment with potent CYP3A4 inhibitors (including: ketoconazole, clarithromycin, telithromycin, nefazodone and HIV protease inhibitors), (v) severe SARS-CoV-2 infection or signs of severe COVID-19 requiring hospitalization or intensive care unit admission, (vi) hyposmia persisting >90 days after the onset of symptoms, (vii) other causes of hyposmia found upon questioning the patient or by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and (viii) patients benefiting from legal protection measures. Pregnant or breastfeeding women and patients who had SARS-CoV-2 symptoms during the follow-up phone interview carried out eight days after inclusion were also excluded. An MRI examination was not compulsory because it served as a secondary endpoint and most refusals were due to scheduling issues or due to patients having claustrophobia and not wishing to undergo an MRI.
Patient comorbidities and symptoms were described based on a clinical assessment at inclusion. Patients were randomized (1:1) between the EG and CG cohorts using an electronic case report form. The randomization list was stratified by hospitals. Participants and caregivers were aware of the group assignment, however, people assessing the outcomes were blinded to the group assignment. An initial patient follow-up by telephone was scheduled eight days after inclusion to check for the absence of new COVID-19 symptoms and to gain a better understanding of the treatment method. A second follow-up held 15 days after study inclusion was conducted by phone to assess treatment adherence and to inquire about any adverse effects (AEs).
Nasal irrigation was stopped for patients who declared that they had completely recovered their olfactory capacities before any appearance of COVID-19 symptoms. However, olfactory rehabilitation was pursued twice a day until the next follow-up visit. EG patients with incomplete recovery were required to continue treatment for 30 days and CG patients subsequently started budesonide for 30 days in addition to their initial non-corticosteroid treatment. The next follow-up visit was scheduled between 60 to 70 days after inclusion and the last follow-up was conducted by phone 8 months (±2 weeks) after inclusion.
We hypothesized that 50% of CG patients would have olfactory improvement after 30 days. In order to demonstrate a 25% difference between the two groups (50% in the CG vs 75% in the EG experiencing olfactory improvement) with a two-sided α of 0.05 and β of 0.20, we calculated the sample size to be 60 for each group for a total of 120 patients.
The primary endpoint was the percentage of patients with an improvement of more than two points on the ODORATEST score after 30 days of treatment [[14],[15]. Secondary endpoints for the EG included the assessment of olfactory recovery persistence 1 month after the end of treatment, an assessment of interest in continuing budesonide for an additional 30 days for those not fully recovered after 30 days of treatment, and to determine the percentage of patients with an improvement of more than two points in the ODORATEST score 30 days after the end of treatment with budesonide or after 60 days of treatment with budesonide. Three measures were performed at inclusion and during the follow-up period: a gustatory and olfactory function evaluation via a self-questionnaire, a gustatory and olfactory survey, and a visual analog scale [[16],[17]. Tolerance to budesonide was evaluated and a description of AEs and serious AEs (SAEs) was compiled. An MRI was performed to assess the possible presence of inflammatory filling of the olfactory cleft or the presence of neurological damage to the olfactory bulb. Other endpoints consisted of identifying an association between the presence of an obstruction (detected via the MRI) and the severity of the olfactory loss at inclusion and after 30 days of treatment.
The descriptive analysis was conducted with numbers and percentages (%) for the qualitative variables, while mean (SD), median and range was used for the quantitative variables. The normality of continuous variables was assessed graphically, and a description of the missing data for each variable was compiled. A logistic regression model adjusted by center was performed. In the event of missing data, the Baseline Observation Carried Forward method was employed. Hence, patients not assessed at day 30 were considered as not having presented any improvement [[18]]. A sensitivity analysis under the missing completely at random assumption was also conducted. A chi-square, Fisher exact, Wilcoxon and Student's t-test were performed for secondary endpoints. All tests were two-sided with P <0.05 considered as statistically significant.
In accordance with French legislation, the study received approval from the CPP Sud-Est II (IRB) on April 29, 2020, and from the ANSM on May 14, 2020 and was registered with EUDRACT (No. 2020-001667-85 and NCT04361474).
Results
In total, 123 patients were included and subsequently randomized (EG: 62.0 vs CG: 61.0) (Figure 1). The mean age of patients was 40.6 years and 40.1 years in the CG and EG, respectively. Most patients were female (CG: 67.2% vs EG: 67.7%) (Table 1). A history of transient anosmia was indicated in 13 patients. Most patients had a sudden olfactory disorder (CG: 93.4% vs EG: 95%), which mostly appeared after the initial symptoms (CG: 60.7% vs EG: 65.6%) and had been in contact with a confirmed COVID-19 case (CG: 70.9% vs EG: 71.7%) (Table 1). Olfactory symptoms concomitant to other COVID-19 symptoms were more prevalent in the CG (23%) than in the EG (8.2%). Patients had a similar history of allergy (CG: 42.6% vs EG: 36.1%) and more rhinologic history in the CG (34% of which 87.7% reported allergic rhinitis) than in the EG (19.7% of which 66.6% reported allergic rhinitis). Details of patient symptoms are described in Table 2.
Two EG patients showed a higher than two-point improvement on the ODORATEST after 30 days, however no improvement was seen with CG patients. The logistic regression model was not conducted due to the low number of participants reaching the endpoint and therefore a Fisher's exact test was subsequently conducted to compare the results between the two groups. No statistical difference (P = 0.5) was revealed (Table 3).
One EG patient recovered completely after 30 days but was not followed up thus making it impossible to assess the recovery persistence after 60 days. In the EG group, 55 patients did not completely recover after 30 days, however none showed any improvement on the ODORATEST score 60 days after inclusion even though they continued the treatment 30 days longer. In the CG, 54 patients did not completely recover after 30 days nor did they have any improvement on the ODORATEST score 30 days after having added budesonide to the treatment.
Regarding the self-questionnaire, there was no difference found between the two groups and the olfactory capacities between the two arms after 30 days of treatment. The ODORATEST global score (P >0.9), detection sub-score (P = 0.8) and identification sub-score (P = 0.8) showed no difference (Table 3). Sub-par adherence to the treatment was seen in both groups after 15, 30 and 60 days (Supplementary Table 1). Between the inclusion and day 30, having correctly performed nasal irrigation was declared by 50% of CG patients and 48% EG patients. The principal reason for not performing the nasal irrigations was stated as forgetting to do them (CG: 54.2% vs EG: 53.8%).
There were two SAEs detected during the study (Table 4). In the CG, one patient had a severe sore throat requiring hospitalization and surgery for phlegmon. Nasal irrigation was temporarily stopped and then reintroduced with no new occurrence of SAEs. In the EG, one patient had a semi-recent cerebral ischemia that was discovered on the MRI. There were 15 AEs (CG: 7 vs EG: 8). Three patients from the CG (42.9%) and three from the EG (37.5%) suffered AEs related to the study (Table 4).
Among all patients included, 94 patients underwent an MRI at inclusion and 92 patients at the 30-day visit. Among those with an MRI at inclusion, 52 had an olfactory slit obstruction (CG: 27/51 patients [53%] vs EG: 23/50 patients [53.5%]). After 30 days, 24 of 42 patients (57.1%) in the CG group had an olfactory slit obstruction vs 25 out of 50 patients (50%) in EG. There was no statistical difference between olfactory slit obstruction and the ODORATEST results at inclusion or at 30 days (P = 0.3 and P = 0.2, respectively). One patient presented an olfactory bulb abnormality on the MRI at inclusion, however, there was no statistical association with the ODORATEST (P = 0.3) (Supplementary Table 2). Finally, 54 patients from both groups completed an 8-month follow-up questionnaire that showed an improvement in the smell scale compared with the data at inclusion (Supplementary Figure 1).
Discussion
This study found that budesonide as a local intranasal treatment for persistent hyposmia in patients with non-severe COVID-19 has no efficacy in improving olfactory symptoms. Our findings are consistent with other clinical trials performed to evaluate the efficacy of intranasal corticosteroids such as betamethasone [[19]] or mometasone [[18]] for similar symptoms. An overall improvement of olfactory symptoms was observed after eight months, however, there was no association found between the anatomical characteristics imaged by the MRI and olfactory symptoms. As reported in previous studies [[20],[21], we could not prove that the local nasal irrigation reached the olfactory cleft because olfactory slit obstruction did not improve after 30 days on the MRI and we could not perform endoscopies during the pandemic period.
Despite being a potential factor of the lack of efficacy demonstrated, the suboptimal adherence to treatment in both the CG and EG may not be a critical factor. Similarly, patients who did not recover after 30 days did not recover completely after 60 days either.
While it is known that most patients with COVID-19-related hyposmia recover within a short to middle-term duration, this knowledge was not available at the time of our protocol definition. Therefore, we targeted the local edema within the olfactory mucosa as reported in Jafar et al. [[22]]. The results of our study support the idea that one month after infection, edema and local mechanisms are no longer the primary contributors to residual olfactory loss. Instead, this study suggests that persistent olfactory impairment is more likely due to a sensory deficit resulting from neurosensory loss in olfactory cells. Underlying neurological physiopathology may explain the lack of efficacy of local budesonide at one month from onset as shown in Butowt and von Bartheld [[23]]. This is consistent with previous research indicating that the recovery of olfactory function following viral infection may be influenced by damage to the olfactory cells themselves.
Despite several published studies on the efficacy of inhaled budesonide on COVID-19 infections, none of these concerned the treatment of hyposmia or anosmia [24, 25, 26, 27, 28]. One clinical trial that included 18 patients evaluated the use of systemic prednisone and nasal irrigation with betamethasone, ambroxol and rinazine over 15 days and found an improvement in the EG after a 40-day follow-up based on the Connecticut Olfactory Test [[29]]. The study was the only one included in a Cochrane systematic review with a live updating process. Evidence from the intervention in this systematic review was assessed to be “very uncertain” [[30]]. Overall, it reported “very limited evidence available” on the treatment of persistent olfactory issues related to COVID-19 infection. Regarding other topical and systematic therapies, Abdelazim et al. [[31]] noted that the use of chelating agents such as intranasal ethylene diamine tetra acetic acid along with olfactory training may improve olfactory dysfunction post-COVID-19 infection. Lowering elevated calcium cations with the use of intranasal sodium gluconate and 2% nitrilotriacetic acid trisodium salt were also considered in literature [[32],[33]. These studies found significant improvement of functional anosmia and COVID-19 related olfactory dysfunction [[32],[33].
The symptomatic description of olfactory dysfunctions described in our study matched those from other published multicenter studies. One study with a cohort of 1031 adults had similar symptom descriptions and indicated that olfactory symptoms occurred after other COVID-19 symptoms (43.5%), and their onset was sudden in 80.4% of these patients. Most patients (66%) completely recovered after six months of follow-up [[34]].
The main strength of this study was the design used to assess the efficacy of budesonide. Given that the two groups received similar treatment except for the addition of budesonide in the EG, we were able to assess the specific effect of the drug without significant methodological bias. In comparison to literature, the sample size of the study was another strength. The estimation of the necessary inclusion number was based on prior observations [[35]], however, due to the novelty of the disease at the time of the study, it was difficult to correctly estimate the effect of the treatment.
The main limitation of the study may have been in its restricted geographical scope since the study was only conducted in two medical centers and that the methodology used was uncommon. Another limitation was the timing of the treatment. At first, we intended to initiate budesonide treatment earlier in the management of patients. Unfortunately, at the time of our study, the French ethics committees required a negative PCR result and a minimum delay of one month since the onset of infection before initiating treatment. As we mentioned, it is possible that an earlier introduction of budesonide could have influenced the results. It may also be worth noting that more patients had a history of rhinitis (particularly allergic rhinitis) in the CG than in the EG, without having the option of treatment at the time of the study. Allergic rhinitis can also affect olfaction, which could have biased the results.
Conclusion
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first clinical trial providing results evaluating local budesonide for the treatment of COVID-19 related hyposmia even though previous trials were conducted with other local corticosteroids. No efficacy was demonstrated for local budesonide treatment on persistent COVID-19 related hyposmia. The results of this study strengthen the hypothesis that one month after the onset of infection, cellular damage is already occurring and that the use of an anti-inflammatory does not modify the course of olfactory impairment. These findings may contribute to evidence currently available concerning treatment options for related conditions and may guide future trials on a global scale.
