Poor long-term prognosis in patients admitted with strong suspicion of acute myocardial infarction but discharged with another diagnosis
Background
Chest pain suggestive of acute myocardial infarction (MI) is a dominant cause of presentation to the emergency medical system [1]. Clearly defined diagnosis and treatment pathways for MI [2, 3] have improved prognosis immensely [4, 5]. Moreover, much focus has been put on algorithms to early and safely rule-out MI already in the emergency department, which by now is recommended in guidelines [2, 3]. Patients admitted with a strong suspicion of MI but discharged without an MI diagnosis comprise a heterogeneous group where treatment algorithms are not well-defined and established, and contemporary data on characteristics, cardiovascular (CV) risk factors, hospital course and CV outcomes are limited.

The recent 4th universal definition of myocardial infarction (UDMI) introduced a conceptual model for interpretation of myocardial damage with the entities acute myocardial infarction including type 1 MI and type 2 MI, acute myocardial injury and chronic myocardial injury [6]. However, controversy remains on the utility, terminology and clinical use [7-10].

The contemporary DETermination of the role of Oxygen in suspected Acute Myocardial Infarction (DETO2X-AMI) trial enrolled 6629 patients with strong suspicion of myocardial infarction defined as symptoms suggestive of acute MI, changes in electrocardiography (ECG) indicating ischaemia and/or high-sensitivity cardiac troponin (hs-cTn) levels above the 99th percentile on admission. In 5010 (76%) patients, the final diagnosis of MI was confirmed, whereas the remaining 1619 (24%) patients were discharged without a diagnosis of MI.

In the present observational cohort study, we sought to describe the non-MI population concerning background characteristics, hospital course and cardiovascular outcomes in the short, median and long-term perspective in relation to patients discharged with confirmed MI.

Materials and method
Study design
The DETO2X-AMI trial was a nationwide, multicentre, open-label, registry-based randomized clinical trial (RRCT) [11] comparing routine supplemental oxygen and ambient air in patients admitted with strong suspicion of MI. The Swedish Web System for Enhancement and Development of Evidence-Based Care in Heart Disease Evaluated According to Recommended Therapies (SWEDEHEART) [12] Registry was used for patient recruitment, trial procedures and follow-up.

The study design [13] methods and primary results have been reported [14-16]. The trial was approved by the Ethical Review Authority (DNR 287-12) and the Swedish Medical Products Agency (EudraCT 2013-002882-20).

The funding agencies had no access to the study data and no role in trial design, implementation or reporting.

Patient population
At first medical contact with the ambulance service, emergency department, coronary care unit or catheterization laboratory of participating hospitals, patients were assessed for eligibility. To identify patients with a high likelihood of MI, inclusion criteria included on top of age ≥30; symptoms suggestive of MI (chest pain or dyspnoea) for <6 h; oxygen saturation of ≥90% on pulse oximetry; and in particular, electrocardiography (ECG) changes indicating ischaemia [17] and/or raised high-sensitivity cardiac troponin (hs-cTn) levels on admission above the 99th percentile of the upper reference level. To enable complete follow-up from the Swedish National Population Registry [18], only Swedish residents with a unique personal identification number were enrolled.

Exclusion criteria included ongoing oxygen therapy or cardiac arrest prior to recruitment.

For the present analysis, patients with a primary discharge diagnosis of MI – both non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) and ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) – defined as International Classification of Diseases (ICD), Tenth Revision, codes I21 and I22 as primary or secondary diagnosis – were compared with patients without an MI diagnosis at discharge. The latter group was further subdivided into primary discharge diagnosis of ischaemic heart disease (IHD), defined as ICD code I20 or I25, except I21 and I22; other CV diseases, defined as ICD code I except MI/IHD diagnoses; unspecified chest pain, defined as ICD code R07; and remaining other noncardiovascular diagnoses.

Since the primary analyses concerning the effects of oxygen therapy compared with ambient air showed no interaction on death or cardiovascular outcomes [14], we assessed the whole study population irrespective of randomized treatment for this analysis.

Study procedures
Eligible patients were after initial oral informed consent randomly assigned to either oxygen therapy at 6 L min−1 for 6–12 h delivered by open face mask or ambient air. Patients received supplemental oxygen outside the protocol limits at the discretion of the caring physician, in particular in cases where hypoxaemia (defined as oxygen saturation < 90%) developed, which was reported separately. Otherwise, all patients were treated according to standard of care.

End-points and follow-up
All-cause death was the primary end-point of the DETO2X trial [19]. To further characterize cardiovascular outcomes in the present subgroup analysis, we present as main end-point the composite of all-cause death, rehospitalization with MI, heart failure (HF) or stroke up to 3.7 years of follow-up. As secondary end-points, individual components including CV death, and the composite end-point, were reported at 30 days, at one year, in total and in subgroups of patients.

Mortality data were obtained from the Swedish Population Registry, which includes the vital status of all Swedish residents with 99.5% completeness within a month [18]. Data on rehospitalization with MI were obtained from the SWEDEHEART Registry and were defined according to ICD codes I21 and I22. Data on hospitalization for HF and stroke were obtained from the National Swedish Patient Registry [20], including all ICD codes from all admissions in Sweden, and defined as ICD code I50 and codes I60-I64, respectively.

Data on cardiovascular death, defined as ICD codes I00 through I99 or unclassified, were obtained from the Swedish National Cause of Death Registry.

The end of follow-up was 30 December 2016, 1 year after randomization of the last patient resulting in a median follow-up time of 2.1 (range: 1–3.7) years. No central adjudication or study-specific patient follow-up was performed.

Statistical analysis
The sample-size calculations for the overall trial have been described in detail previously [13, 14]. The subgroup analysis according to discharge diagnosis (MI vs non-MI) in the ITT population with suspected MI (N = 6629) was prespecified and presented in the Figures S1, S2 and Table S1 to the main publication [14].

Baseline and outcome data were presented descriptively for the non-MI patients in total and by diagnosis group (IHD, other non-MI CV diagnosis, chest pain or other non-CV diagnosis), and for the MI patients, and compared between non-MI and MI using the chi-square or Mann–Whitney test. Hs-cTn T data were presented using an empirical cumulative distribution function (ECDF) plot, and median and quartiles and by arbitrary categories <15, 15–100 or >100 ng L−1. Outcome event data were presented using the Kaplan–Meier curves with pointwise 95% confidence bands, calculated as asymptotic confidence bands for the log–log-transformed survivor function, and as number and percentage of patients with an event, and incidence rate for first events as per cent/year, up to day 30, day 365 and during the entire follow-up period. For patient time, each started calendar day was counted as one day. 95% confidence intervals for incidence rates were calculated using a Poisson model for individual patient data with time to event as an offset and robust variance estimates.

To aid the interpretation of cardiovascular event rates in the non-MI patients, we also present weighted Kaplan–Meier curves illustrating estimated outcomes in a theoretical non-MI population with the same distribution of age and sex as in the MI population. The weights were obtained from a logistic regression for patient group (MI/non-MI) as outcome, with sex, age modelled as a restricted cubic spline with knots at the 5, 27.5, 50, 72.5 and 95 percentile, and their interaction, as independent variables.

All analyses were conducted with SAS v.9.4 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA).

Results
Study population
Of the 6629 patients with suspected MI who were enrolled in the main trial, 1619 (24%) received a non-MI discharge diagnosis. Amongst these, 414 patients (26%) were diagnosed with IHD (unstable angina, stable angina, chronic ischaemic heart disease), 471 patients (29%) with other CV diagnoses (heart failure, arrhythmia, cardiomyopathy, perimyocarditis), 492 patients (30%) with unspecified chest pain and 242 patients (15%) with other non-CV diagnoses. The remaining 5010 patients (76%) received a primary discharge diagnosis of MI (2952 [59%] STEMI, 2058 [41%] NSTEMI) (discharge diagnoses listed in detail in Figures S1, S2 and Table S1).

As shown in Table 1, patients discharged with a non-MI diagnosis were more often female and suffered more commonly from previous cardiovascular disease and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and had correspondingly more medications at admission (β-blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme [ACE] blockers/angiotensin receptor blockers [ARBs], diuretics, statins, antiplatelets and anticoagulation) as compared to patients discharged with MI. Other risk factors such as diabetes and hypertension were similarly distributed. In contrast, MI patients were more often smokers and arrived at a greater extent by ambulance to the hospital. At presentation, non-MI patients were more often admitted due to dyspnoea and had more commonly atrial fibrillation (AF) and nonspecific ECG changes (t-inversions and bundle branch blocks) (Table 1).

Table 1. Baseline characteristics, clinical presentation and final diagnoses divided by discharge diagnosis (non-MI vs MI)a In-hospital procedural data
Overall, the hospital stay was shorter in the non-MI patients who underwent less commonly diagnostic and therapeutic procedures, were less commonly treated for acute heart failure and suffered less commonly of in-hospital complications such as rhythm disturbances (new-onset atrioventricular block or AF), cardiogenic shock, cardiac arrest or in-hospital death (Table 2).
Clinical end-points divided by discharge diagnosis and follow-up time
Clinical end-points at 30 days, 365 days and during all follow-up (366–1357 days, mean: 792 days) are visualized in Figs 1 and 2 and presented in detail in Table 3.
Table 3. End-points divided by discharge diagnosis (non-MI vs MI) at 365 days after randomization and during all follow-up. Number of patients with event (%) and incidence rate for first event per patient (%/year) with 95% CI Non-MI versus MI population
For the short-term follow-up (30 days), the incidence of the main composite end-point of all-cause death, rehospitalization with MI, hospitalization for HF or stroke was 2.8% (45 of 1619) in non-MI patients, compared to 5.0% (250 of 5010) in MI patients with lower incidences in all individual end-points except stroke, which was similar.

At one year, the incidence of the composite end-point was similar between the two groups, 11.5% (186 of 1619) in non-MI patients, compared to 11.6% (581 of 5010) in patients with MI.

For the long-term follow-up (median: 2.1 [range: 1-3.7] years), the incidence of the composite end-point increased in the non-MI patients to 17.7% (286 of 1619) as compared to 16.0% (804 of 5010) in MI patients, mainly driven by a higher incidence of all-cause death, stroke and HF.

Even after illustrating estimated outcomes in a theoretical non-MI population with the same distribution of age and sex as in the MI population, results remained similar (Figure S1).

Data for the highest measured level of hs-cTn T showed a significant difference between the diagnosis groups with a greater myocardial injury in patients with MI. When categorized by hs-cTn level (<15, 15–100, >100 ng L−1), 50% of the non-MI patients had moderate hs-cTn elevations between 15 and 100 ng L−1, whereas 33% displayed levels below the 99th percentile. In comparison, the great majority of MI cases (86%) showed clear hs-cTn T elevations above 100 ng L−1 (Figure S2, table 1).

Non-MI subgroups
In the short-term perspective, the incidence of the composite end-point was highest in patients with other CV nonischaemic diagnoses (3.6%) compared to patients with IHD (2.9%), chest pain (1.8%) or other non-CV diagnoses (2.9%), driven by a higher mortality (all-cause and CV).

In the long-term perspective up to 2.7 years, the composite end-point occurred most commonly in patients with IHD (21.7%), followed by patients with other CV diagnoses (18.7%), other non-CV diagnoses (18.2%) and unspecified chest pain (13.0%). In IHD patients, the combined incidence was mainly driven by new MIs, whereas in patients with other CV diagnoses, HF hospitalization was the most frequent CV event. In patients discharged with non-CV diagnoses, all-cause death with predominately non-CV causes was most common (Fig. 3, Table 3).
Discussion and conclusion
In this descriptive cohort study derived from the randomized DETO2X trial that enrolled patients with strong suspicion of MI, we described patients discharged with a non-MI diagnosis concerning background characteristics, procedures and cardiovascular outcomes in the short-, medium- and long-term perspective in relation to patients discharged with confirmed MI. We found that the non-MI patients were more commonly female, suffered more frequently from previous cardiovascular disease, presented with dyspnoea symptoms and more unspecific ECG changes, and showed lower levels of max hs-cTn T and less commonly acute cardiovascular complications during a shorter hospital stay. In the short-term perspective, outcomes were more favourable in the non-MI patients, but from one year onwards, more frequent cardiovascular events including death contributed to a worse long-term prognosis as compared with MI patients.

In the literature, the reported prevalence of myocardial infarction, myocardial injury or other diagnoses in patients evaluated for suspected MI varies remarkably. In unselected patients with chest pain presenting to the emergency department, the prevalence of type 1 MI ranges from 5 to 15% [21-24]. When selecting patients based on elevated cardiac troponin concentrations irrespective of symptoms, adjudicated index diagnosis comprised type 1 or type 2 myocardial infarction in 7–20% and 25–65% of patients, respectively. [25, 26]. In the DETO2X trial, we aimed to enrol patients in the acute setting with a high likelihood of type 1 MI by requiring not only typical symptoms, but also ischaemic ECG changes assessed by a specialized cardiac nurse or cardiologist, and/or a single elevated troponin level above the decision limit for MI. This resulted in a distribution of 76% of patients discharged with an MI diagnosis and 24% with a non-MI diagnosis [14].

Concerning baseline characteristics, our findings on non-MI patients go well in line with previous studies describing the different entities of myocardial injury [25, 27-29]. We observed significantly lower levels of max hs-cTnT in the non-MI patients as compared to MI patients: One third of the non-MI patients had hs-cTnT below the 99th centile; consequently, they were enrolled based on symptoms and ECG changes only. We do not know whether the ECG changes observed were new or developed as a consequence of previous cardiovascular disease and/or other comorbid conditions, which were more frequent at baseline in these patients. Furthermore, half of the patients had a hs-cTnT elevation between 15 and 100 ng L−1 identifying myocardial injury of moderate degree, a similar pattern as observed in the observational trials mentioned above [25, 26]. In particular, 70% of patients with a discharge diagnosis of ischaemic heart disease in the non-MI group had troponin concentrations that were above the 99th centile. It is possible that a number of patients with these moderate increases in hs-cTnT were misdiagnosed as non-MI. Consequently, these patients may have been prescribed less effective treatment as well, which is also reflected in our data (Table 2).

As only the highest level of hs-cTnT was available in our study, we were unfortunately not able to differentiate acute from chronic nonischaemic myocardial injury, a common finding in the elderly, patients with renal failure or patients with chronic cardiac conditions [30].

In our trial, during the hospital stay and short-term perspective, the clinical course was more severe in MI patients who suffered more commonly of CV complications despite a more aggressive approach with more intensive diagnostics and therapy. Within one year, however, outcomes were similar in the two groups, with a slight overweight for recurrent ischaemic events in the MI patients as compared with more HF events in the non-MI patients. In the long-term perspective, non-MI patients had a worse prognosis still driven mainly by nonischaemic CV events and non-CV death. Amongst non-MI patients, prognosis was best in patients discharged with unspecified chest pain, notwithstanding far from good: within less than 3 years, 6% were dead, and 4% had developed MI or HF. In contrast, the observational studies with unselected patients enrolled by elevated hs-cTnT reported much higher 4- to 5-year all-cause death rates in those with type MI (44-63%) or myocardial injury (48–72%) compared with type 1 MI (24–37%) [25, 26] as compared to our results (9% all-cause death in the non-MI patients at 2.7 years). This discrepancy may in part be based on the fact that in our randomized trial, frailer patients were ineligible for enrolment because they were hypoxaemic at presentation or, for medical reasons, unable to provide oral consent, aspects closely linked to poor prognosis [31]. Furthermore, younger and healthier subject discharged with unspecified diagnoses improved the overall prognosis in the non-MI patients.

In general, the distinction between myocardial injuries of different aetiologies is challenging. Commonly, in patients admitted for suspected MI, coronary angiography is performed to rule-out type 1 MI. In our trial, it was performed in 95% of patients diagnosed with type 1 MI as compared with 54% of non-MI patients. Unfortunately, we do not know the exact reasons for this difference or if other noninvasive techniques were applied to define aetiology. Probably, the clinical picture evolving during the initial phase of hospitalization guided the treating physicians towards other more likely diagnoses, including type 2 MI and nonischaemic acute or chronic myocardial injury. Although by now clearly defined as clinical entities [6], the optimal approach to the latter aetiological categories remains uncertain. In cases when invasive imaging is not clinically indicated, experts and guidelines put emphasis on anatomical or functional noninvasive imaging to differentiate underlying causes of myocardial dysfunction [3, 32, 33].

Regardless of appropriate use of multiple diagnostic tools potentially leading to better classification of non-MI aetiologies, evidence-based treatment options are only well-established for type 1 MI despite existing evidence that diabetes, hypertension, renal dysfunction and previous CV disease predict poor prognosis even in patients evaluated for chest pain of unspecific aetiology [34, 35]. In our trial, half of the non-MI patients were discharged on aspirin, β-blockers, ACE/ARB and statins.

To overcome some of the aetiological, diagnostic and therapeutic challenges described, several actions are proposed: first, epidemiological studies need to clarify the entities of myocardial injury based on the 4th UDMI [6]. Second, a future revision of the ICD coding needs to include codes in specific agreement with the taxonomy of the latest UDMI. Third, novel diagnostic approaches and specific therapeutics need to be tested in prospective studies [32]. Most importantly, the heterogeneous composition of the non-MI group of patients needs to be acknowledged leading to an individualized goal-directed approach to improve prognosis.

A limitation of our data includes that clinical and procedural end-point parameters were obtained from the SWEDEHEART Registry and the Swedish National Population Registry based on ICD-10 codes and no adjudication of events or diagnoses was performed, in particular not with regard to the latest UDMI. Therefore, we cannot exclude coding errors causing misclassification bias, although we overall estimate the risk to be low that such errors are common enough to significantly influence the results of the study [12, 20].

In conclusion, in the short-term perspective, outcomes were more favourable in the non-MI patients, but from one year onwards, cardiovascular outcomes and death contributed to a worse long-term prognosis for patients discharged with a non-MI diagnosis as compared with MI patients. Future epidemiological and interventional research in an improved classification environment is warranted to individually better characterize and treat non-MI patients.
