A prospective phase IIA multicenter double-blinded randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial evaluating the efficacy and safety of inhaled Tobramycin in patients with ventilator-associated pneumonia (iToVAP)
Introduction
Ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) is a common infection in intensive care units (ICUs), associated with significant increases in length of stay, duration of mechanical ventilation, and, in some patients, increased mortality [1]. Intravenous (i.v.) antibiotics are the standard treatment for VAP patients against bacterial pathogens. Aerosolized administration of antibiotics is an attractive alternative to parenteral administration and renders new chances for the treatment of resistant pathogens as it delivers high concentrations of antibiotics directly to the site of infection [2], [3], [4], [5]. In the present clinical trial, we thus investigated the safety and efficacy of aerosolized Tobramycin (Tobra) in comparison to the application of 0.9% sodium chloride solution to patients suffering from VAP caused by Gram-negative pathogens. The aim of the study was the successful eradication of the pathogen and the reduction of the reinfection rate compared to i.v. treatment.

Materials and methods
Study design and patients
The present iToVAP trial was a prospective phase IIA multicenter, double-blinded, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial. It was approved by the ethics committee of the Landesamt für Gesundheit und Soziales (LaGeSo) Berlin (13/0233 — EK 11) and registered in the EU Clinical Trials Registry (EudraCT number: 2012-003621-21) on 23.09.2013. The trial was conducted at Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany, a 3000-bed university hospital in Germany. The trial was performed in accordance with the International Conference on Harmonization Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice and the Declaration of Helsinki.

Patients admitted between February 2014 and May 2019 were eligible for the study inclusion if they were 18 years or older, had VAP, were intubated (including via tracheostomy), were mechanically ventilated, and had a Gram-negative pathogen in microbiological diagnostics. The microbiological diagnostic method is described in the Supplement. VAP was defined as the presence of a new or progressive pulmonary infiltrate in chest radiography or CT scan and two of the following:
1)
Temperature >38.3 °C or <36.0 °C,

2)
Leukocyte count >12.000/mL or <4.000/mL,

3)
Purulent tracheal secretions.


Each patient fulfilling the inclusion criteria after having given written informed consent by him-/herself or a legal representative was included in the study.

Participants were excluded if they either had a diagnosis of cystic fibrosis, were chronically colonized with non-fermenting organisms before hospitalization, or had received antibiotic treatment for pneumonia and other infections for more than 48 h before study drug administration. Financial support was warranted by the producer of Tobramycin (Novartis Pharma GmbH, Switzerland).

Randomization and masking
On the day of enrolment, patients were randomized in a 1:1 fashion to the two treatment arms: either to the verum arm with Tobramycin inhalation or to the placebo arm with 0.9% aerosolized sodium chloride. Randomization was performed using a computerized algorithm. Randomization was set up without lists and was dynamically randomized using the “variance minimization” method. The treatment was double-blinded.

Procedures
On the day of inclusion into the study, the patient was randomly assigned to receive either 5 mL of aerosolized 0.9% sodium chloride solution (placebo group) or 300 mg of aerosolized Tobramycin (intervention group) in 5 mL sodium chloride solution adjunctive to standard-of-care intravenous antibiotics. Both the aerosolized sodium chloride solution and Tobramycin were administered twice daily for five days by trained ICU staff. Both treatments were aerosolized and administered via a synchronized inhalation system (Aerogen®solo, Aerogen Ltd., Ireland). Selection and duration of i.v. antibiotic treatment was on the order of the blinded treating physician. The standard-of-care treatment typically included two antibiotics recommended by national guidelines [3]. To ensure patient safety, daily aminoglycoside peak levels were determined 60 min after inhalation and reported to an independent medical team. All patients included in the primary efficacy analysis had ventilator-associated pneumonia with Gram-negative pathogen in the microbiologic result (refer to the microbiological method in Supplement for more information). All participants were treated with ten doses of verum or placebo for five days.

The records of subjects who received additional treatment with aerosolized Tobramycin (Tobra Inhal group) were compared with those who did not receive Tobramycin Inhal (control group). Characteristics evaluated included patient age, comorbid conditions, and Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE) II at the time of inclusion. Study assessments were done on inclusion day and days 1–5 (visits 1–6), two days after the end of study medication (visit 7), and two days after the end of systemic antibiotic medication (Tx + 2). The final visit was on the day of discharge of the patient from the ICU (at maximum within 90 days from enrolment. Respiratory samples were obtained at all visits. Data were collected from the local patient data management system (PDMS) COPRA (Copra System GmbH, Sasbachwalden, Germany).

Primary and secondary endpoints
The primary endpoint was the eradication of the endobronchial Gram-negative bacteria in the pulmonary system at visit 6 of the treatment.

The secondary endpoints were:
a)
Length of stay in ICU assessed at the final visit,

b)
Clinical cure of pneumonia assessed each day until two days after the termination of systemic antibiotic treatment,

c)
Duration of systemic antibiotic treatment for pneumonia,

d)
Systemic antibiotic-free days assessed on the day of discharge from ICU,

e)
Duration of ventilation for pneumonia,

f)
Ventilator-free days in ICU

g)
Reinfection of pneumonia caused by the same verified pathogen detected in the initial microbiological examination.


Statistical analysis
The sample size was calculated using Fisher’s exact test and assuming a power of 85% with a two-sided significance level of 5%. A total of 12 patients per group was required to detect an absolute difference of 65% in the eradication of the pathogen between groups. To compensate for the premature exclusion of patients from the study, a dropout rate of 10% was considered, resulting in a total sample size of 28 patients (14 per group). The calculation was done with nQuery Advisor (Version 7.0). To evaluate the primary endpoint Boschloo’s exact test was used, instead of Fisher’s exact test because Boschloo’s test is uniformly more powerful [4]. The probability for eradication was calculated with 95% Confidence Intervals (95%CI) by using the Wilson method. Due to the separation, the effect estimate was calculated with a logistic regression model using Firth’s bias reduction method [5]. The evaluation of secondary endpoints must be understood as explorative, therefore p-values do not allow confirmatory conclusions and we did not control for multiple testing. Due to the small sample size, the non-parametric Mann–Whitney-U test was used for continuous endpoints and Boschloo’s exact test was used for dichotomous endpoints. The secondary endpoints, demographic and baseline characteristics were analyzed descriptively. For continuous variables, descriptive statistics included median, and interquartile range (IQR). For categorical variables, statistics included absolute and relative frequencies. Prior or concomitant medications and diseases in respect of lung disease, hearing disorders, and renal insufficiency were listed individually by a patient and shown descriptively. Frequencies, duration of intake or use, and differences between treatment groups were listed and descriptively presented. All adverse events (AEs) and serious adverse events (SAEs), whether or not they are considered treatment-related, are reported along with whether they are a “suspected unexpected serious adverse reaction” (SUSAR). Some symptoms should not be documented as AEs because they are a consequence of the underlying disease; these are listed in the Supplement.

Results
A total of 408 patients were assessed for eligibility and 26 enrolled and randomly assigned to the Tobra Inhal or placebo group. Study medication was not applied to one patient due to withdrawal of consent after randomization (exclusion criteria) and one patient was unblinded because of side effects after inhalation. Both patients were in the control group (Fig. 1). Thus, the final analysis included 26 patients, 14 patients in the Tobra Inhal group, and 12 patients in the control group. Patients’ demographic and disease characteristics were similar in both groups at baseline. The ratio between male and female patients was balanced in the placebo and intervention groups. There were no differences in ethnicity, age, or body mass index. Also, the severity of illness, as indicated by the Apache II score on admission to the ICU, was comparable (Table 1). The Clinical Pulmonary Infection Score (CPIS) at inclusion was also identical in both patient cohorts (Table 2). Nephrotoxicity was monitored by serum creatinine assessment. No significant difference in median serum creatinine values between the Tobra Inhal group and placebo group was detected at the time of inclusion (Table 2). The peak level of Tobramycin for both groups is shown in Supplemental Table S1. The eradication of the Gram-negative pathogens was significantly more common in the intervention group than in the control group (p < 0.001). After Firth’s bias reduction, the Odds Ratio was 4.36 [95% CI: 1.97–9.32]. The probability of eradication was 100% in the intervention group [95% CI: 0.78–1.0; Wilson method] and 25% in the control group [95% CI: 0.09–0.53; Table 3]. No between-group differences in the proportion of infections were found. Approximately half of the participants had poly-microbial infections, and 40% of the participants were co-infected with Gram-negative and Gram-positive organisms (Table 4). Recurrence of pneumonia caused by the same verified pathogen detected in the initial microbiological examination was detected in 36% in the treatment and 67% in the placebo group. Reinfection occurred predominantly in patients with evidence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The median duration of intravenous standard-of-care antibiotics among these patients was 8 days (8 [7; 9.5] in Tobra Inhal vs. 6 [6; 9] days in the control group; p = 0.324). Patients in the Tobra Inhal group were free of systemic antibiotics for a median of 5 (3; 7) days after inclusion in the study compared with 4 (2.8; 6.5) days in the control group (p = 0.712). The increased eradication frequency was not associated with increased patient survival. 13 (93%) of the 14 patients in the Tobra Inhal group and 11 (92%) of 12 patients in the control group survived until the final visit. We found no difference between groups in terms of survival in the efficacy population. In the intervention group, the clinical cure of pneumonia was assessed at visit 6 with 77% (vs. 64% in the control group; p = 0.585). The median CPIS at visit 6 did not differ between the two groups (3 [2.8; 3.5] vs. 4 [3; 5]; p = 0.757, Tobra Inhal vs. control group). No patient was extubated before day 5. However, the median duration of invasive ventilation for pneumonia showed no difference in the Tobra Inhal and Placebo group, although the ventilator-free time was longer in the control group than in the intervention group with Tobra, without significance (Table 3). The median length of stay in the ICU showed no difference between the treatment (12 [7.5; 19] days) and the control group (14 [10; 27] days; p = 0.465) (Table 3). In total, three single serious adverse events (SAEs) and one adverse event (AE) were reported (Table S2).
Discussion
In the present clinical trial in intubated, mechanically ventilated intensive care patients with Gram-negative pneumonia, eradication of these pathogens was significantly more effective with an additional inhalation of Tobramycin to the standard-of-care therapy. The study’s primary endpoint, the eradication of Gram-negative pathogens, was achieved in all patients.

The eradication of pathogens indicates that the treatment has successfully eliminated the source of the infection, which can lead to clinical improvement and help prevent the development of antibiotic resistance, a growing problem in the treatment of bacterial infections. Inhaled antibiotics have been shown to achieve high concentrations in the lung tissue and airways, resulting in the effective eradication of pathogens with a low risk of systemic side effects, which can be particularly important for critically ill patients who may be more susceptible to adverse drug reactions [6]. Our study found a very heterogeneous distribution of Gram-negative pathogens with a high proportion of P. aeruginosa, but all pathogens were eradicated. The recently published large phase 3 trial INHALE of Niederman et al. also showed in the post hoc analysis a more frequent eradication with inhaled Amikacin than with placebo in patients without cystic fibrosis. In this study, eradication was also higher in the active arm with inhaled Amikacin but never >75% [7].

In the present study, successful eradication was not associated with a reduction in systemic anti-infective therapy, a shorter ICU stay, or even a survival benefit. But no multi-drug-resistant pathogen was found, and all patients received an appropriate anti-infective i.v. therapy. With a higher proportion of multi-resistant pathogens and inadequate initial anti-infectious i.v. therapy, it can be assumed that patients will receive a potential survival benefit with inhaled Tobramycin. Korbila et al. even demonstrated a better outcome in the treatment of VAP due to multi-drug-resistant Gram-negative pathogens when inhaled colistin was used in combination with i.v. colistin compared to i.v. colistin alone [8]. Similarly, Tumbarello et al. found in a retrospective case-control study of 208 patients a higher clinical cure rate and fewer days on a ventilator with colistin aerosolized in addition to i.v. therapy [9]. However, several reviews and studies show the same result, that microbiological eradication does not result in a significant reduction in mortality [10], [11], [12], [13], [14]. In our study, no benefits were found in the intervention groups in terms of the duration of mechanical ventilation or clinical response to pneumonia. Simultaneous administration of i.v. and inhaled therapy at diagnosis of VAP could positively impact clinical response. Although inhalation antibiotics deliver high doses of potentially toxic drugs directly to the affected site and minimize systemic exposure, the local application reduces the selection pressure on the intestinal flora and offers advantages regarding systemic side effects, such as in the case of pre-existing renal insufficiency. In our study design, inhaled Tobramycin was always administered together with a systemic antibiotic. Further studies should investigate de-escalation to inhaled therapy as a monotherapy for sensitive strains.

Limitations
This trial represents ventilated patients from different ICUs, but the process of enrolment was slower than expected. It appears that the slow rate of inclusion was due to specific reasons related to the study design, such as the requirement for an antibiotic-free interval and the time required for microbiological diagnosis. These factors may have limited the pool of eligible participants and contributed to the slow enrollment rate. This slow rate of inclusion could have impacted the study’s results, particularly if it led to a small sample size or biased participant selection. The estimated effect could therefore be imprecisely determined within the confidence interval. Thus, there is a risk that the effect is overestimated. This study provides the first indications of the effect of Tobramycin compared to a placebo and needs to be investigated in further studies. In the future, clinical trials with a greater number of study participants should focus on inhaled therapy as a monotherapy.

Conclusion
Inhaled aerosolized Tobramycin demonstrated clinically meaningful efficacy in patients with VAP. The probability of eradication in the intervention group was 100%. The use of Tobramycin inhalation appears to be safe and to cause no significant systemic side effects. Inhaled antibiotic therapy cannot be generally recommended at present, but its use in the treatment of VAP in critically ill patients is especially significant. In the presence of multi-drug-resistant Gram-negative pathogens supplemental inhaled therapy with nebulizers suitable for this purpose should be considered in addition to systemic antibiotic therapy.