Introduction
Malaria remains a major global health problem, with nearly half of the world's population living in transmission areas across 85 countries and territories.1 Previously, substantial progress in disease control was accomplished by scaling-up the provision of long-lasting insecticidal nets (LLINs), indoor residual spraying (IRS), and other key diagnostic and treatment measures.2 In the past two decades, WHO estimated that 1·5 billion malaria cases and 7·6 million malaria deaths were averted, with LLINs accounting for 68% of these achievements and IRS accounting for 10% of these achievements. However, rates of malaria decline have stalled, coinciding with the emergence of several biological and non-biological challenges, of which the rapid spread of insecticide resistance across Anopheles mosquito populations now seriously threatens vector-control efforts worldwide.3,  4,  5
In response to pervasive insecticide resistance, substantial investments have been made in the development of new insecticides and chemical classes with distinct methods of action, which can be used to improve mosquito control and potentially mitigate further selection for insecticide resistance. The first new class of dual-active-ingredient LLINs were treated with a mixture of a pyrethroid (PY) and a synergist, piperonyl butoxide, which enhances insecticide toxicity by inhibiting the activity of metabolic enzymes that are commonly overexpressed in resistant vector populations. Piperonyl butoxide PY-LLINs received a WHO recommendation after successful evaluation in two cluster-randomised controlled trials (cRCTs) after 2 years of community use.6 In these cRCTs, piperonyl butoxide PY-LLINs reduced malaria infection prevalence by 44% in Tanzania7 and by 27% in Uganda8 compared with standard PY-LLINs in areas of intense pyrethroid resistance. A second generation of LLINs, combining a pyrethroid and either a pyrrole (chlorfenapyr) or insect growth regulator (pyriproxyfen), have also been assessed in two cRCTs, with chlorfenapyr reducing malaria infection prevalence by 55% after 2 years in Tanzania9 and 46% after 2 years in Benin.10
Effective insecticide-resistance management strategies are predicated on a clear understanding of the specificity of resistance mechanisms to individual insecticides and the likelihood of selecting for cross-resistance in genetically diverse vector species with distinct life histories.11 As dual-active-ingredient LLINs are scheduled for universal distribution across multiple malaria-endemic regions, understanding their effects on the dynamic evolution of insecticide resistance is crucial, particularly throughout the operational lifetime of these interventions.
Using data nested within the cRCT in Tanzania,9 which evaluated the effectiveness of three dual-active-ingredient LLINs compared with PY-LLINs, we aimed to measure phenotypic and genotypic insecticide-resistance profiles among wild Anopheles collected over 3 years to assess the longitudinal effects of dual-active-ingredient LLINs on insecticide resistance.
Methods
Study design and participants
Data for this analysis was nested in a 3-year, four parallel-arm, superiority cRCT conducted in 84 clusters (39 307 households) formed of 72 villages in the Misungwi district, Mwanza region, northwest Tanzania.9 The major malaria-vector species were Anopheles arabiensis, Anopheles gambiae sensu stricto (SS), and Anopheles funestus sensu lato (SL), with An funestus SS being responsible for more than 90% of ongoing malaria transmission during trial baseline.12 Most LLINs in the Misungwi district before the cRCT were Olyset (Sumitomo Chemical, Tokyo, Japan) permethrin-only LLINs, which were distributed during the previous universal-coverage campaign in 2015 and through antenatal care clinics. PermaNet 2.0 (Vestergaard, Lausanne, Switzerland) deltamethrin-only LLINs accounted for 33% of LLINs, which were distributed via the annual school net campaign.
The cRCT study groups were Royal Guard (Disease Control Technologies, Greer, SC, USA), combining the insect growth inhibitor pyriproxyfen (5·5 g/kg) and the pyrethroid α-cypermethrin (5·5 g/kg), henceforth referred to as pyriproxyfen PY-LLINs; Interceptor G2 (Badische Anilin und Sodafabrik, Ludwigshafan, Germany), combining the pyrrole chlorfenapyr (4·8 g/kg) and α-cypermethrin (2·2 g/kg), henceforth referred to as chlorfenapyr PY-LLINs; Olyset Plus (Sumitomo Chemical, Tokyo, Japan), combining the synergist piperonyl butoxide (10·0 g/kg) and the pyrethroid permethrin (20·0 g/kg), henceforth referred to as piperonyl butoxide PY-LLINs; and the reference group Interceptor (Badische Anilin und Sodafabrik, Ludwigshafan, Germany), containing α-cypermethrin (5·0 g/kg), henceforth referred to as PY-LLINs. Between Jan 26 and Jan 28, 2019, 147 230 LLINs were distributed among the four study groups and monitored for 3 years. Community members and the field team were masked to group allocation. The trial design has been reported previously.13
The cRCT, registered with ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT03554616), obtained ethical approval from the National Institute for Medical Research Tanzania (NIMR/HQ/R.8a/Vol. IX/2743), Kilimanjaro Christian Medical University College (2267), the University of Ottawa (H-05–19–4411), and the London School of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene (14952). The use of guinea pigs to feed colony mosquitoes received approval from the Animal Welfare and Ethical Review Board of the London School of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene (2019–14). All study procedures were conducted in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations. Before study initiation, community consent was obtained from village leaders and written informed consent was obtained from the heads of all households that were selected for participation. Study information, including the study purpose, risks, and benefits, was provided to participants in Swahili.
Procedures
Between May 24, 2019, and Oct 25, 2021, wild, blood-fed, indoor-resting mosquitoes were collected annually during the rainy seasons from house walls in clusters from all four trial groups with Prokopack (John W Hock Company, Gainesville, FL, USA) and manual aspirators and were held for 3 days to allow for blood-meal digestion. Mosquitoes were sampled every year from Isesa and Lubili villages (both of which were using piperonyl butoxide PY-LLINs), Mbarika village (using chlorfenapyr PY-LLINs), Ihelele, Ilujamate hamlet (using PY-LLINs), and Nyangh’omango, Ilujamate hamlet (using pyriproxyfen PY-LLINs; appendix p 6). From July 23 to Sept 17, 2020, mosquito collections were also done in Igokelo village (using pyriproxyfen PY-LLINs). All mosquitoes were provided with 10% glucose solution and maintained at 26°C (±3) and 60–80% relative humidity with 12 h cycles of light and dark. Mosquitoes were morphologically identified as An gambiae SL or An funestus SL14 before separate bioassay testing.
US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) insecticide-resistance intensity bioassays for α-cypermethrin and permethrin were conducted according to published guidelines.15 Chlorfenapyr bioassay testing was done with a diagnostic dose of 100 μg per bottle.16 Piperonyl butoxide pre-exposures used 4% impregnated piperonyl-butoxide papers in WHO tube assays.16 Per bioassay, approximately, 20–25 wild-caught, adult, female An gambiae SL or An funestus SL were exposed to pyrethroid insecticides for 30 min or to chlorfenapyr for 60 min. Surviving mosquitoes were held and scored for delayed mortality after 24 h, 48 h, and 72 h.
For pyriproxyfen testing, 20–25 freshly collected, blood-fed, adult, female An gambiae SL or An funestus SL were exposed to 100 μg per bottle or 1000 μg per bottle pyriproxyfen for 60 min. Furthermore, the laboratory, pyrethroid-susceptible An gambiae SS Kisumu strain was assayed at the same time as the field mosquitoes were being bioassayed; mosquitoes aged 2–5 days were blood-fed on guinea pigs before testing. After insecticide exposure, surviving mosquitoes were held for 72 h, after which gravid mosquitoes underwent ovarian dissection with a light microscope. Each mosquito was scored for fertility status and Christopher's egg stage of development.17 At the end of each exposure and dissection period, all mosquitoes were stored at –80°C in RNAlater (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).
Because of the predominance of An funestus SL in the study area,12 this vector species was the focus of subsequent molecular characterisation. Unexposed individual mosquitoes were homogenised with Qiagen Tissue Lyser II (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) with 5 mm stainless-steel beads and RNA was extracted via Qiagen RNeasy 96 kit according to the manufacturer's instructions. Approximately 2 μg of each RNA sample were treated with RQ1 rNase-free DNase (Promega, Southampton, UK). 1 μg of DNase-treated RNA per individual mosquito was used to synthesise cDNA with a High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Molecular identification of An funestus SL was done according to described protocols.18 Quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) was used to measure expression of nine metabolic genes that had been previously implicated in pyrethroid resistance in An funestus SL populations across sub-Saharan Africa (appendix p 5).19,  20 Standard curves of cycle threshold values for each gene were generated with a five-fold serial dilution of cDNA to assess PCR efficiency. Reactions were conducted in technical duplicate with a Stratagene Mx3005P Real-Time PCR system (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) with FastStart Essential DNA Green Master mix (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Reaction conditions were denaturation for 10 min at 95°C, then 40 cycles of 10 s at 95°C, 22 s at 55°C (CYP4H17, CYP6M7, CYP6Z1, CYP9K1, GSTE2, CYP6P9a, and CYP6P9b), or 60°C (CYP6M1 and CYP6N1), then 10 s at 72°C. The fold change of each target gene in field populations, relative to the susceptible laboratory strain (An funestus SS FANG colony strain), was calculated with the 2−ΔΔCT method, incorporating PCR efficiency; ribosomal protein S7 and actin were used for normalisation.
Outcomes
The primary outcomes were lethal-dose values (ie, lethal dose [LD]25, LD50, LD95, and LD99) calculated at 30 min after insecticidal exposure to α-cypermethrin, permethrin, and piperonyl butoxide pre-exposure plus permethrin-resistance intensity bioassays; mortality 72 h after insecticidal exposure to chlorfenapyr; fertility reduction 72 h after insecticidal exposure to pyriproxyfen, assessed by ovarian dissection; and fold change in metabolic-enzyme expression relative to an insecticide-susceptible laboratory strain. All primary outcomes were measured in An funestus SL, the dominant vector-species complex, 1 year, 2 years, and 3 years after LLIN distribution and were compared between intervention and reference groups. Primary outcomes were also assessed in An gambiae SL if enough mosquitoes were collected. The secondary outcome was the effect of pyrethroid-insecticide exposure on delayed mortality of An funestus SL. We also conducted secondary analyses to assess differences in pyrethroid phenotypic-resistance intensity in multiple clusters from the same trial group.
Statistical analysis
Mortality of 5–20% in control assays was corrected with Abbott's formula. LD25, LD50, LD95, and LD99 were estimated with a probit model with log10-transformed data. Curve estimation was based on the probability of mosquito death as a function of the total number of mosquitoes and insecticide dose. Point estimates of LDs and 95% CI were then back-transformed to their original scale to obtain the reported values; these values indicate the difference in diagnostic dose of an insecticide required to kill 25%, 50%, 95%, or 99% of tested mosquitoes (appendix pp 9–12). The model incorporated an automated-heterogeneity factor in the CI calculations to obtain unbiased interval estimates. If the sample size or death probabilities were insufficient to derive stable estimates, LD point estimates were replaced with a value less than the lowest value tested to indicate that the estimate was less than the lowest tested concentration. Comparisons of LD50 values among clusters or years were statistically estimated with relative median potency (RMP), which was calculated as the ratio of point estimates with simultaneous 95% CIs. Comparisons of potency in this analysis are median lethal concentrations or doses. A ratio of 1 was not significant; it would mean that the LD50 was equal among comparison groups. The RMP test is a traditional analysis in probit models and has been shown to align with other methods for comparing LD50 values.21 To complement the probit models, we also developed generalised linear mixed models (GLMMs) with a logistic link function to model potential differences in survival probability among collections occurring in multiple treatment groups, study years, test replicates, and testing dates. For delayed-mortality analysis, Cox regression was used to compare hazard rate ratios (HRRs), adjusted for test replicate to account for changes in vector-population structure across collection periods, between mosquitoes exposed to or not exposed to pyrethroid or piperonyl butoxide then pyrethroid (or piperonyl butoxide then acetone), and between different insecticide doses. A ratio of 1 was not significant; it would mean that the HRR was equivalent among comparison groups. Therefore, 95% CIs not containing the value 1 were interpreted as being statistically different. Fertility reduction in pyriproxyfen-exposed populations was calculated as 100 × (the proportion of fertile control female mosquitoes – the proportion of fertile pyriproxyfen-exposed female mosquitoes)/the proportion of fertile control female mosquitoes. Metabolic-enzyme fold change was compared between trial years with the Kruskal-Wallis test in Prism version 9.5.0 (GraphPad, Boston, MA, USA). Probit analyses were conducted in SPSS version 28, GLMMs were conducted in SPSS version 29, and Cox regression models were developed with SAS version 9.4.
Role of the funding source
The funders of this analysis had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report.
Results
Between May 24, 2019, and Oct 25, 2021, 47 224 female Anopheles were collected in the Misungwi district for resistance monitoring. 8942 (18·9%) were collected in year 1 (7847 [87·8%] An funestus SL and 1095 [12·2%] An gambiae SL), 17 413 (36·9%) were collected in year 2 (13 251 [76·1%] An funestus SL and 4162 [23·9%] An gambiae SL), and 20 869 (44·2%) were collected in year 3 (13 290 [63·7%] An funestus SL and 7579 [36·3%] An gambiae SL). A summary of mosquitoes collected and tested per insecticide and study groups is available in the appendix (pp 6–8). In all study years, An funestus SL was the dominant vector-species complex, although its proportions declined steadily during the trial from 7847 (87·8%) of 8942 in year 1 to 13 290 (63·7%) of 20 869 in year 3. CDC indoor light-trap collections after intervention indicated that most An funestus SL were An funestus SS (81·7%, 95% CI 75·7–86·5) and that most An gambiae SL were An arabiensis (93·8%, 86·3–97·3).22 Species identification of a subset of 1440 phenotyped An funestus SL, collected manually from house walls, were also concordant (92·8% [91·4–94·1] An funestus SS; 4·2% [3·1–5·2] Anopheles rivulorum; 3·1% did not amplify).
In the PY-LLIN group, there were significant increases in α-cypermethrin-resistance intensity and permethrin-resistance intensity in An funestus SL during the first 2 years (table 1; table 2). A significant increase in permethrin-resistance intensity was also observed in year 3, but there was no increase in α-cypermethrin-resistance intensity. Increasing pyrethroid-resistance led to a significant decrease in piperonyl-butoxide synergy (ie, increasing mosquito mortality) in An funestus SL across all 3 years; greater permethrin concentrations were required after exposure to piperonyl butoxide to induce complete lethality over time.

In the chlorfenapyr PY-LLIN group, initial pyrethroid resistance in An funestus SL was lower than in the PY-LLIN group (table 1; table 2). No longitudinal increases in α-cypermethrin-resistance intensity or permethrin-resistance intensity were observed during 3 years in the chlorfenapyr PY-LLIN group (table 1; table 2). A significant decline in piperonyl-butoxide synergy was evident by the third year.
In the pyriproxyfen PY-LLIN group, pyrethroid resistance in An funestus SL was low, similar to the chlorfenapyr PY-LLIN group in the first year (table 1; table 2). However, over time, An funestus SL from the pyriproxyfen PY-LLIN group showed increasing α-cypermethrin-resistance intensity and permethrin-resistance intensity and declining piperonyl-butoxide synergy, similar to the PY-LLIN group. The significant increases in pyrethroid-resistance intensity were greater in the pyriproxyfen PY-LLIN group than in the PY-LLIN group.
An funestus SL collected in two piperonyl butoxide PY-LLIN clusters were grouped together for analysis (individual cluster-level analysis; appendix p 13), showing the largest significant increases in pyrethroid resistance across trial years and concomitant declines in piperonyl-butoxide synergy. Differences in the rate of pyrethroid-resistance evolution were also apparent, with no significant increase in α-cypermethrin resistance in the first 2 years but a significant increase in permethrin-resistance intensity during the same time period.
Insecticide-resistance intensity varied between geographically proximate study clusters. The PY-LLIN cluster and pyriproxyfen PY-LLIN cluster were adjacent villages, presenting different initial pyrethroid-resistance intensity profiles in An funestus SL (table 1; table 2). Significant differences in pyrethroid-resistance intensity were observed between more geographically separate clusters (appendix p 14).
GLMM logistic results were consistent with the probit models, but also accounted for covariate effects (appendix p 23). For all insecticides, significant differences were found among years. For α-cypermethrin, pairwise trial-group differences were significant except for pyriproxyfen PY-LLINs versus PY-LLINs and pyriproxyfen PY-LLINs versus piperonyl butoxide PY-LLINs. Permethrin results were consistent, with significant pairwise comparisons for all trial groups except PY-LLINs versus piperonyl butoxide PY-LLINs and piperonyl butoxide PY-LLINs versus pyriproxyfen PY-LLINs. For piperonyl butoxide plus permethrin, all pairwise trial groups differed significantly (appendix p 23).
The effects of dual-active-ingredient LLINs on the evolution of pyrethroid-resistance intensity was more challenging to ascertain in An gambiae SL because of relative species complex availability throughout the trial. Longitudinal data were available for An gambiae SL collected from the piperonyl butoxide PY-LLIN group, which showed no significant increase in α-cypermethrin-resistance intensity during the trial years (appendix p 21), and collected from the pyriproxyfen PY-LLIN group, which showed a significant increase in α-cypermethrin-resistance intensity between year 1 and year 2 and year 1 and year 3 (appendix p 22). However, the magnitude of change was considerably less than observed for An funestus SL collected in the same study cluster.
All vectors exposed to pyrethroids were held for 72 h to assess any effects of insecticide on delayed-mortality rate. There was a significant reduction in survival during this holding period for An funestus SL exposed to α-cypermethrin, permethrin, and piperonyl butoxide across all trial groups (appendix pp 15–17, 26–31). An inverse relationship was apparent between pyrethroid-resistance intensity and delayed mortality; as resistance intensity increased over time, a decline in delayed mortality was observed (ie, exposure to higher concentrations of insecticide were required to elicit this effect; appendix pp 18–20, 26–31).
Regarding resistance to new active ingredients, populations of An funestus SL were susceptible to the diagnostic dose of chlorfenapyr in all study groups throughout the trial (appendix p 24). Populations of An gambiae SL had lower rates of mortality after chlorfenapyr exposure (appendix p 22). Populations of both An funestus SL and An gambiae SL across all trial groups had some reduction in fertility after exposure to one or ten times the diagnostic dose of pyriproxyfen (table 3; appendix p 22). High or complete sterility was observed in the susceptible control colony (An gambiae SS Kisumu) after exposure to one or ten times the diagnostic dose of pyriproxyfen in each trial year.

Changes in expression of nine metabolic genes was monitored in PCR-confirmed An funestus SS in each group for 3 years after the intervention. Across all four groups, CYP6M7, GSTE2, and CYP6M1 showed consistent minimal over-expression relative to the susceptible colony (data not shown).
In the PY-LLIN group, CYP9K1 (fold change 9·43), CYP4H17 (42·49), and CYP6N1 (549·37) were all highly over-expressed in year 1, with expression levels significantly decreasing across trial years (year 3 CYP9K1 0·63; year 3 CYP4H17 7·03; year 3 CYP6N1 39·06; figure A). A similar decrease in expression level of CYP9K1 (year 1 173·59 vs year 3 0·63), CYP4H17 (year 1 29·18 vs year 3 7·03), and CYP6N1 (year 1 233·68 vs year 3 39·06) was also observed in the pyriproxyfen PY-LLIN groups (figure C). There was evidence for ongoing selection of CYP6P9b (year 1 2·73 vs year 3 8·81 in the PY-LLIN group; year 1 2·61 vs year 3 8·81 in the pyriproxyfen PY-LLIN group; figure A, C).

In the chlorfenapyr PY-LLIN group, over-expression of several metabolic enzymes fluctuated dynamically across the 3 trial years (eg, year 1 CYP9K1 fold change 7·27, year 2 99·91, year 3 9·90; year 1 CYP6N1 67·81, year 2 6·86, year 3 67·75; figure B). This group was the only group in which CYP6P9a was under selection (year 1 0·09 vs year 3 16·08; figure B).
In the piperonyl butoxide PY-LLIN group, there was evidence of selection for CYP9K1 (year 1 FC=2·31 vs year 2 10·64), CYP4H17 (year 1 6·89 vs year 2 31·19), and CYP6N1 (year 1 195·20 vs year 2 520·06), which diminished by year three (figure 1D). Conversely, over-expression of both CYP6Z1 (year 1 0·33 vs year 3 3·82) and CYP6P9b (year 1 4·18 vs year 3 11·93) increased significantly during the trial years (figure D).

Discussion
The widespread distribution of three dual-active-ingredient LLINs and PY-LLINs had significant effects on insecticide-resistance selection in the primary malaria vector An funestus SL during 3 trial years in northwest Tanzania. Findings showed an increase in both α-cypermethrin-resistance intensity and permethrin-resistance intensity and a concomitant decline in piperonyl-butoxide synergy in most trial years for the PY-LLIN, pyriproxyfen PY-LLIN, and piperonyl butoxide PY-LLIN groups. These observations might be unsurprising in the PY-LLIN group but lead to substantial concerns about the long-term implications of PY-LLIN campaigns, which continue across many malaria-endemic areas. To date, there have been few studies, but they have shown robust insecticide-resistance monitoring activities that effectively show the extent to which PY-LLINs intensify phenotypic resistance in established, resistant vector populations. This analysis presents novel evidence of phenotypic and genotypic resistance selection in vector populations during a short time span, suggesting that ongoing widespread use of PY-LLINs is unsustainable and advising against the reliance on current LLIN tools, including piperonyl butoxide PY-LLINs, for malaria-vector control and resistance management.
Arguments have been made for the ongoing use of PY-LLINs to provide personal protection as a physical barrier or by eliciting delayed mortality of vectors after exposure.23,  24 In most trial clusters, significant delayed mortality was observed, which might have also diminished overall malaria transmission. However, persistent deployment of PY-LLINs, as well as cross-resistance between type I and type II pyrethroids,25 can contribute to the selection of alternate, generalist resistance mechanisms, including cuticular thickening or salivary-gland detoxification, which impart other fitness benefits to resistant vectors but have enduring consequences for the design and evaluation of candidate insecticides for malaria-vector control.26
In the pyriproxyfen PY-LLIN group, despite comparatively low initial pyrethroid resistance, populations of An funestus SL rapidly developed highly intense pyrethroid resistance, which might have been driven by cross-resistance mechanisms that have been reported between pyriproxyfen and pyrethroid insecticides in both An gambiae SL and An funestus SL.27 The largest increase in pyrethroid-resistance intensity was shown in the piperonyl butoxide PY-LLIN group; by year 3, the concentration to kill 95% of An funestus SL was more than 50 times the diagnostic dose of permethrin despite pre-exposure to piperonyl butoxide. These results probably reflect selection for over-expressed metabolic-detoxification enzymes or alternate resistance mechanisms, providing a cautionary rationale for the distribution of piperonyl butoxide PY-LLINs to avoid further exacerbating the pyrethroid insecticide-resistance crisis.
Of the three dual-active-ingredient LLINs assessed, the chlorfenapyr PY-LLIN group showed no significant selection for pyrethroid resistance, supported by minimal reductions in chlorfenapyr susceptibility throughout the trial. Currently, chlorfenapyr PY-LLINs are a promising dual-active-ingredient LLIN to control malaria transmitted by pyrethroid-resistant vector populations. However, reliance on a single intervention for reactive resistance management is inadvisable because of the propensity of Anopheles to rapidly evolve resistance to new active ingredients and reports of incipient reduced chlorfenapyr susceptibility from west and central sub-Saharan Africa.28 Our findings strengthen trial epidemiological outcomes, with chlorfenapyr PY-LLINs providing superior protection from malaria across multiple transmission seasons; piperonyl butoxide PY-LLINs remained effective for the first year and pyriproxyfen PY-LLINs had no significant effect on disease incidence.9 The rapid loss of the protective efficacy of piperonyl butoxide PY-LLINs and overall lack of pyriproxyfen PY-LLIN intervention effect can be explained by the significant increase in permethrin-resistance intensity in the piperonyl butoxide PY-LLIN group and pre-existing tolerance to pyriproxyfen in the trial area in the pyriproxyfen PY-LLIN group. Furthermore, relative differences in LLIN textile and chemical durability, surface bioavailability, and household use also influenced the evolution of insecticide resistance in the Misungwi district. By the end of the trial, less than 20% of community members reported using their pyriproxyfen PY-LLINs or piperonyl butoxide PY-LLINs (unpublished). These nets were also in poor physical condition, with severe depletion of both pyrethroid (α-cypermethrin reduced by 40% and permethrin reduced by 59%) and partner active ingredients (pyriproxyfen reduced by 73% and piperonyl butoxide reduced by 93%; unpublished). Although the effective longevities of dual-active-ingredients are still being investigated, leaving pyriproxyfen PY-LLINs or piperonyl butoxide PY-LLINs in the field after their optimum operational lifespans might have exposed vector populations to sublethal insecticide doses, expediting resistance selection and potentially worsening the pyrethroid-resistance intensification observed in this analysis.29,  30
Subanalyses and molecular monitoring of key detoxification enzymes that had been previously implicated in pyrethroid resistance in An funestus SL across central and southern Africa, and in other parts of the Lake Zone in Tanzania,19,  20 have revealed several insights. After LLIN distribution, CYP4H17, CYP6N1, and CYP9K1, which were already over-expressed in populations of An funestus SL, began to decrease, which is indicative of ongoing selection for other resistance mechanisms that were not under active surveillance in the cRCT.9 In comparison, levels of CYP6P9a and CYP6P9b expression increased during the trial. In both CYP6P9a and CYP6P9b, cisregulatory polymorphisms, which drive transcriptional upregulation, have been significantly associated with reduced efficacy of PY-LLINs and piperonyl butoxide PY-LLINs in experimental hut trials.31,  32,  33 Currently, CYP6P9a is the only enzyme incriminated in pyriproxyfen metabolism in An funestus in vitro.27 However, selection for this gene was only observed in the chlorfenapyr PY-LLIN group, suggesting the presence of additional, undescribed cross-resistance mechanisms in the Misungwi district that require further elucidation. Study clusters that were fewer than 2–4 kilometres apart showed distinct genotypic and phenotypic profiles (table 1; table 2; figure), emphasising how focal and heterogeneous insecticide resistance can be on a microgeographical scale. Several of the metabolic enzymes assessed in this analysis (ie, CYP6M7 and CYP6M1) were previously over-expressed in An funestus populations in the first cRCT evaluating piperonyl butoxide PY-LLINs in a different part of the Lake Zone of Tanzania but did not appear to be under selection in the cRCT.9,  20 This variability advocates for widespread, in-depth, genetic characterisation of vector populations during trial baselines to better inform the effects of insecticidal interventions on the selection of novel-resistance mechanisms.
Our results should be interpreted in the context of several limitations. An funestus SL mosquitoes were collected as indoor resting adults due to difficulties in identifying reliable, productive breeding sites and rearing this vector species under controlled insectary conditions. Individual mosquitoes were held for 3 days to minimise the effect of blood-meal digestion on metabolic-gene expression; however, because adults were of unknown age and because phenotypic resistance declines over time,34 pyrethroid resistance was possibly underestimated. During the first year, mosquitoes were challenging to collect from the piperonyl butoxide PY-LLIN group, probably due to an intervention effect after LLIN scale up as vectors that were available for resistance monitoring might have inherently been those that were more resistant to chemical exposure.9 Furthermore, because collections were done in multiple months, population age, parity, life history, and species composition were variable. However, a logistic GLMM approach was used to account for potential differences in survival probability by treatment groups, study years, test replicates, and testing dates. Throughout the trial, the proportion of An funestus SL steadily declined compared with An gambiae SL.22 Phenotypic results indicated different selection pressures acting on An gambiae SL (mostly An arabiensis), with little evidence for an escalation in pyrethroid-resistance intensity in this species complex. This finding might be explained by the propensity for An arabiensis to avoid insecticidal exposure by feeding and resting outdoors in areas with high intervention coverage.35 Finally, contamination of larval breeding sites with agricultural pesticides probably also contributed to increased insecticide resistance via cross-resistance mechanisms, but was not directly assessed.36
This secondary analysis of a 3-year cRCT showed the differential effects of dual-active-ingredient LLINs containing either chlorfenapyr, piperonyl butoxide, or pyriproxyfen on phenotypic and genotypic insecticide-resistance selection in An funestus SL. Although chlorfenapyr PY-LLINs had no significant selection for phenotypic pyrethroid resistance and vector populations remained susceptible to the partner active ingredient throughout the trial, piperonyl butoxide PY-LLINs, pyriproxyfen PY-LLINs, and PY-LLINs all intensified insecticide resistance. Increased pyrethroid resistance by PY-LLINs was not surprising but continued widespread distribution of these nets will have potentially severe consequences for the selection of cross-resistance mechanisms, as shown in this analysis between different types of pyrethroids and between pyrethroids and pyriproxyfen. Ongoing deployment of PY-LLINs might further drive the evolution of novel insecticide-resistance mechanisms, which will further complicate the design of new insecticidal interventions for malaria-vector control. Piperonyl butoxide PY-LLINs have now replaced PY-LLINs as the standard of care in most sub-Saharan African countries. However, our findings indicated that these LLINs could be worsening the pyrethroid insecticide-resistance crisis among Anopheles species with anthropophilic and endophagic behaviours. Furthermore, pyriproxyfen PY-LLINs were largely inadequate for resistance management due to shared cross-resistance mechanisms with pyrethroids. At the molecular level, this analysis showed the focal nature of specific insecticide-resistance mechanisms among vectors with distinct life histories and supports improved genetic characterisation of diverse mosquito populations across different ecologies, transmission intensities, and malaria-endemic areas to better inform pre-emptive resistance monitoring and intervention development. Our findings also challenge the viability of tactical deployment of an already small number of insecticidal interventions and argue for rapid development and evaluation of novel insecticidal tools and alternative strategies for global malaria control.