Mental practice maintains range of motion despite forearm immobilization: a pilot study in healthy persons
INTRODUCTIONMany orthopedic patients are immobilized for several weeks after operations or injuries that do not allow for weight-bearing. During this recovery period immobility leads to serious com-plications, including reduction in range of motion and muscular atrophy.  Furthermore,  on  a  cortical  level,  immobilization  results  in  central  reorganization  (1,  2),  resulting  in  the  loss  of movement representations and inefficient central control of movement (3). In younger persons this can lead to an ex-tended period of reduced occupational capacity, followed by an extended period of rehabilitation generally leading to full functional and social recovery. In older persons this can cause massive and sometimes irreversible functional and social prob-lems, resulting in nursing home placement or care dependency. Immobilization of the upper limb therefore poses a highly rel-evant clinical problem. Regardless of how the injury is treated, whether surgically, by casting, or by relative immobilization, patients are immobilized for between 4 and 12 weeks. Exercise intervention usually does not start during the immobilization period. The goal of rehabilitation is to achieve complete and rapid recovery of range of motion, muscle strength, and func-tion of the joint and the limb. In order to improve functional outcome, early rehabilitation could offer an advantage in the functional status or accelerate the process of recovery after im-mobilization (4). The treatment procedure should be proactive without stressing the bone and soft tissue. This may prevent, not only the negative physiological side-effects, but also the negative effects of central reorganization (5).Several studies have shown that sensory input is not only the result of performed movements, but also results from simply imagining movements of the limbs (6, 7). Motor imagery is defined as an active process during which the representation of a specific motor action is internally reproduced within working memory without any overt motor output. It is also governed by  the  principles  of  central  motor  control  (8).  Images  of  a  motor  act  focus  on  visual  or  kinesthetic  information  rather  than on the other senses. Visual imagery refers to the ability to see an object or scene in your mind. It is usually static and from a third-person perspective. For example, visual imagery is accomplished when you imagine a hand with a bended wrist holding an insect between 2 fingers. Kinesthetic imagery, in contrast,  requires  the  ability  to  feel,  and  thus  to  experience  the somato-sensory feelings related to the movement, i.e. to perceive muscles contractions mentally. This modality is usu-ally from the first-person perspective and involves dynamic motion (9). Motor imagery often designs a singular internal reproduction of a given motor act. If this is repeated exten-sively,  consciously,  systematically  and  with  the  intention  of  improving performance, it is termed mental practice (10). Several studies have shown that mental practice follows the same movement rules and constraints as physical movements, including temporal regularities (11), programming rules such as Fitts’s law (12), kinematic constraints (11) and vegetative responses (13). Furthermore, both motor execution and mental practice  seem  to  positively  affect  skill  acquisition  (14)  and  motor performance (15). These functional similarities between physically executed and kinesthetically imagined movements are explained within the mental simulation theory (16) by a partially overlap of neural substrates, more precisely of motor and  sensory  regions.  However,  the  neural  activation  for  the  imagined movements seems to be less intense and less localized than when actually performing the task (17). The importance of physical experience in order to achieve an overlap between imagery and execution has been highlighted in several papers (18). This is particularly important when designing effective training protocols in rehabilitation.Based on the neurophysiological findings and on a consider-able number of experimental studies with healthy adults that demonstrate  positive  effects  of  mental  practice  on  physical  performance (19), several research groups have suggested the use of mental practice in physical rehabilitation as a simple and low-cost tool to promote motor recovery (10, 20–23). The main  idea  of  this  approach  is  that  patients  in  orthopedic  or  neurological rehabilitation may benefit from the isomorphic neural  processes  described.  Particularly  those  patients  who,  as the result of a fracture treated by cast, an endoprosthetic/surgical treatment operation, or paralysis after stroke, are either immobilized or still too weak to perform active physical train-ing, might benefit from this cognitive technique. In  orthopedic  rehabilitation,  mental  practice  has  slowly  gained  attention  as  a  promising  psychological  complement  to  conventional  exercise  therapy  approaches.  Compared  with  the  empirical  evidence  in  neurological  rehabilitation,  fewer studies can be found. The potential of mental practice following  injuries  or  amputation  of  the  lower  extremity  has  been  demonstrated  (24–27).  In  literature  about  orthopedic  rehabilitation, however, the influence of mental practice on range of motion is hardly discussed. Although effects of mental practice on range of motion have not been shown before in an applied rehabilitation study after immobilization, an increase in flexibility has been registered in competitive athletes (28). In  another  study  of  healthy  adults,  mental  practice  coupled  with  proprioceptive  neuromuscular  facilitation  resulted  in  a  better range of motion of the hip joint than physical training used alone (29). A randomized controlled trial with patients after knee endoprosthesis showed a significant improvement in knee flexion after a 6-week mental training program (24). In the context of immobilization of the upper extremity, a patient who underwent tendon transfer of the upper limb was treated  by  mental  practice  for  elbow  extension,  resulting  in  enhanced motor recovery of elbow movement (30). A compa-rable study involving short-term muscle immobilization of the hand using a randomized controlled trial with healthy adults explored the effects of mental practice on the strength of the fingers (31). The results suggest that mental practice is useful in preventing the loss of strength associated with immobiliza-tion. Patients using mental practice after flexor tendon repair of a finger injury required less time for movement preparation, which  can  be  interpreted  as  an  improvement  in  the  central  aspects of hand function (32). To best of our knowledge the use of mental practice during the immobilization of the wrist has not yet been described in the literature. Conducting a pilot study with healthy volunteers should be a good first step for exploring the recuperative potential of mental practice during wrist immobilization. We used a training paradigm that combined physical execution and mental rehearsal trials with observation from clinical practice so as to maximize adherence and learning effects (24, 33).brain  imaging  and  behavioural  studies  have  shown  that,  compared  with  the  visual  modality  and  a  third-person  per-spective, the kinesthetic type of imagery from the first-person perspective share more physiological characteristics with a real executed movement (9, 34). The  main  aim  of  this  randomized  prospective  pilot  study  was  to  determine  whether  mental  practice  during  a  3-week  immobilization  of  healthy  wrists  would  result  in  a  greater  preservation of the range of motion, one essential measure of hand function, compared with a non-exercising control group. Mental practice may have this physiological effect on range of motion through the impact at a cellular level on the sarcomeres or connective tissues (28).METHODSA  total  of  20  healthy  male  volunteers  with  a  mean  age  of  25  years  (standard deviation (SD) 4.29; range 20–30 years) replied to a news-paper advertisement inviting people to join the study. The participants were  right-handed  and  lived  in  social  circumstances  that  allowed  the  wearing  of  a  forearm  cast  for  3  weeks.  Other  inclusion  criteria  were the absence of a prior injury of the left hand or arm. Exclusion criteria were a history of a neurological disease or any untreated or unstable medical condition. Two people were rejected as a result of these criteria (Fig. 1). The participants were paid 150 €. In the mental practice group the compensation was paid after the follow-up assessment and with the delivery of a fully completed training-diary. This booklet was applied to augment compliance of the participants and to control whether they practiced  regularly  at  home.  Inside  the  diary  we  stated  that  effects  through  mental  practice  only  by  exercising  regularly  and  we  asked  participants to keep the diary accurately. Participants noted the date, time and duration of their individual training. The study consisted of 2  test  procedures:  pre-intervention  (baseline)  and  post-intervention  testing. After baseline assessment subjects were randomly assigned to either the control group or the mental practice group. Due to resource problems  the  unblinded  assessment  and  the  randomization  process  were performed by TE/DSH.The training procedure was carried out by 2 physiotherapists (bg/JT) who were not involved in any other part of the study. After the baseline assessment both groups underwent fitting of a circular forearm cast for immobilization of their non-dominant (left) radiocarpal joint for 3 weeks. All participants gave their written informed consent. The procedures were approved by the ethics committee of the University of Ulm (No. 275/2004).In each assessment session a clinical evaluation was applied to the participants. Range of motion of the radiocarpal joint was measured in 4 clinical parameters with a goniometer (35): dorsal extension, palmar flexion, radial and ulnar abduction of the wrist joint.The participants in the mental practice group underwent guided train-ing in the hospital as well as unsupervised training at home. both proce-dures followed a specific protocol. Concerning the supervised training they  were  progressively  instructed  to  practice  the  wrist-movements  mentally during a 60-min session. The same tasks were re-discussed, performed and checked by the physiotherapists in 3 more guided ses-sions for 30 min over the next 3 weeks. All participants in the mental practice  group  were  asked  to  practice  individually  at  least  15  min  every day. Each participant maintained the training diary mentioned above in order to record the regularity of this independent training. The applied training program followed the standardized method of Mental gait Training (25, 36). The general procedure (Fig. 2) consists of  6  levels:  1:  movement;  2:  description;  3:  instruction;  4:  practice  (4a: contralateral physical/4b: mental); 5: movement representation; and 6: execution of the movement.Activated inner concepts of the chosen movement (level 1), in this case the wrist movement, were important requirements of subsequently imaging the movement task. Therefore the movement had to be described first on an objective level (level 2). The physiotherapist explained the biomechanical  details  of  the  trained  movement  by  showing  his  own  hand  as  a  model.  In  order  to  achieve  greater  learning  and  retention  results, the trainees verbalized the motor task, and later recorded the task in written form (37). This was also a good means of intervention as it helped avoiding mistakes and enhanced precision. based on the characterization of the movement, instructions (level 3) were worked out. The so-called “nodal points” (38), which are the key steps in the course of the inner map, were developed and emphasized by individual commands.  Mental  practice  (level  4b)  supplemented  by  contralateral  physical training (level 4a) differentiated and stabilized the representa-tions of the movements (level 5). Observation of the non-immobilized extremity  (contralateral  physical  training)  provided  useful  additional feedback  (23)  concerning,  for  example,  posture  or  muscle  tension  in  the trainees. The representation controls and actuates the execution of the motor task (level 6), because it functions as a reference pattern or blueprint of the actual performance. Therefore, functional representation formed a substantial factor of the quality of the movement: it supports the (re-)learning and optimizing of the performance of the movement. To apply level 4a and b of the Mental gait Training we used the following method (Fig. 3). The trained wrist movements were flexion-extension and adduction-abduction of the radiocarpal joint (level 1). The “nodal points” were up-centred-down-centred and inwards-centred-outwards-centred (level 3). In order to develop the differentiated movement imagination (level 4) participants observed, but also experienced, the movements with their right (non-immobilized) hand and were asked to pay attention to their kinesthetic perceptions during the movement. To enforce the kinesthetic perception they duplicated the movement with closed eyes. After having developed this individually customized internal concept of the movement, movement imagination was rehearsed systematically (level  5)  following  3  stages:  (i)  active  execution  with  the  right  side  (1     ×   open  and  1  ×   closed  eyes;  level  5.I);  (ii)  variations  of  the  mental  practice with the right and left side (first: 1 ×  right, 1 ×  left; second: 1 × right,  3 × left,  1 × right,  5 × left;  level  5.II–5.IV);  (iii) final memory consolidation through mental practice of an everyday life task (1 ×   righ 3  ×  left; level 5.V). While the first and second step always referred to the standardized flexion-extension and adduction-abduction movement, only  the  third  step  included  an  individually  customized  mental  task.  Most participants chose knocking on a door, stirring in a pot or the sign “come here”. This customized task has a closer resemblance to their real life and should elevate their motivation. Subjects were instructed to use an internal kinesthetic type of imagery from the first-person per-spective. We ensured that the participants used them by letting them fix the movement description in written form and by subsequently asking regularly about details during realization of the training. Daily repeated rehearsal of the level 5 steps I–V over the period of 3 weeks stabilized the  memory  trace  after  initial  acquisition  of  the  movement.  Overall,  90% of the runs were executed mentally and 10% physically. Detailed guidelines for practitioners are set out in our article “Mental practice in orthopedic rehabilitation: where, what, and how?”(39).Participants in the control group performed no training during the intervention period. Statistical analysisFor statistical analysis, SPSS 11.5 was used. Differences in baseline assessment  were  tested  by  a  t-test.  A  2-way  analysis  of  variance  (ANOVA) for repeated measures was performed to establish the ef-fect of imagery training on clinical parameters (range of motion of the radiocarpal joint). The values established at post-assessment contrasted with the mean values of the corresponding variables during baseline (conventional limits: p = 0.05, p = 0.01, p = 0.001; 2-sided test). The ef-fect size of mental practice treatment on all parameters was evaluated by using a partial ?2 derived from the statistical analysis.Due  to  the  lack  of  prior  research  studies  a  priori  power  analysis  was not conducted.RESUlTSNone of the participants dropped out of the study. The results are based on all 18 persons admitted. The participants attended all prescribed supervised training sessions. The analysis of the variable duration of the individual training  documented  in  the  training-diary  proved  the  same  amount  of  practice  for  every  participant  (Mper  day  = 15.9;  SD 0.852; min =   14; max =   17). The training program was feasible and safe.Demographic variables of the participants subdivided per in-tervention group (nmental practice group = 9; ncontrol group =   9) were similar. Comparison of the baseline assessment of the mental practice group with the control group revealed no significant differences for any of the measured variables (Table I). The mean scores of both groups showed similar baseline values for dorsal exten-sion, palmar flexion, radial and ulnar abduction of the wrist joint. The t-test revealed no statistically significant differences between groups at the pre-intervention measurement. The  expected  effects  of  the  immobilization  were  demon-strated in all participants (Table II). Range of motion of the radiocarpal joint deteriorated in both groups at the follow-up measurement  in  all  4  dependent  variables.  However,  differ-ences between both measurements were clearly smaller in the mental practice group (1.33; 4.89; 3.44; 3.00) compared with the  control  group  (8.78;  10.11;  7.11;  12.00).  These  differ-ences could be an indication of the effects of mental practice intervention.The effect sizes differed between the different movements. The mental practice group demonstrated significantly less limitation  of  range  of  motion  of  the  radiocarpal  joint  con-cerning  the  variables  dorsal  extension  and  ulnar  abduction: factor time  (F1,16= 61.569, p = 0.000, ?2 = 0.794),  respec-tively  (F1,16 = 21.600, p = 0.000, ?2 =   0.574)  and  interaction  time × group (F1,16 =  33.375, p = 0.000, ?2 = 0.676), respectively (F1,16 = 7.776, p = 0.013, ?2 = 0.327). With  respect  to  the  palmar flexion  and  radial  abduction, a significant difference between the imagery group and the control group was found only in the factor time (F1,16 = 26.308, p = 0.000, ?2 =   0.622) and (F1,16 = 5.159, p = 0.037, ?2 = 0.244), respectively, but no significant differences for the interac-tion time × group  (F1,16 = 3.189, p = 0.093, ?2 = 0.166)  and (F1,1 = 0.622, p = 0.442, ?2 = 0.037),  respectively.DISCUSSIONThe  main  outcome  of  the  present  pilot  study  is  that  healthy  participants in the mental practice group showed a significant treatment effect in the range of motion of the radiocarpal joint concerning the variables dorsal extension and ulnar abduction. The members of the control group had greater losses in dorsal extension  and  ulnar  abduction  compared  with  the  members  of the mental practice group after removal of the immobiliz-ing cast. The intervention was feasible and safe and reported adherence  was  good.  The  intervention  should  therefore  be  considered for a safety and feasibility trial for mental practice in forearm fractures leading to immobilization.The  intervention  did  not  reach  all  anticipated  goals.  We  could not demonstrate a significant difference in palmar flexionand radial abduction; we could only detect an improvement by  trend.  by  performing  the  wrist-movements  the  ability  of  moving the hand to the top (dorsal extension) is greater than to  the  bottom  (palmar flexion)  and  turning  the  hand  to  the  outside (ulnar abduction) is easier than to the inside (radial abduction). Data on the descriptive statistics level (Table II) was consistent with this observation: for the variables palmar flexion and radial abduction variation is smaller. It is therefore more difficult to obtain significant results here. Whether this was due to a lack of power, or whether it was related to the exercise regime, remains undetermined. The sample size was too  small  to  examine  the  effects  on  ADl  function  or  other  International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health-relevant  domains,  which  would  be  the  primary  end-points in a rehabilitation trial. Taken together, our data indicates that range of motion of the radiocarpal joint can be positively influenced by mental practice. The optimization of range of motion in the mental practice group may be ascribed to the regular use of the neu-ronal structures, in the strict sense of the internal representation of the hand movement sequence. Immobilization in the control group could be explained, on a neuronal level, by the loss of movement representations, which may have led to temporary loss of memory of the hand function (40) and inefficient central control of movement. In the mental practice group, in contrast, differentiation and stabilization of the internal representation of the movement took place. This may have inhibited the usual process  of  loss  of  mobility  through  immobilization.  Hence,  continuous input from a limb in the form of repeated mental performance of a movement appears to be a central require-ment for preventing the impairment of central reorganization and central control.because  mental  practice  simulates  movement,  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  neural  motor  network  is  activated  while  imaging motor actions. The prefrontal cortex and its connec-tions to the basal ganglia play a crucial role in mental practice for  maintaining  dynamic  motor  representations  in  working  memory (16). After flexor tendon repair and immobilization, patients showed activity of the basal ganglia measured by posi-tron emission tomography while they executed finger flexion movements (40). However, activity in the basal ganglia fails directly after the immobilization period. Continuing stimula-tion of the basal ganglia by mental practice should prevent the neuronal decline from occurring during immobilization (32), which may also have a clinically important effect on motion.Effects of mental practice on range of motion have also been shown for the lower extremity. The use of the mental practice of stretching by competitive athletes (synchronized swimmers) enhanced ankle, hamstrings and adductor flexibility (28). In another study with healthy adults, mental practice coupled with proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation resulted in a better range of motion of the hip joint than was achieved by physical training alone (29). A randomized controlled trial of our group (24) with 26 patients after knee endoprosthesis demonstrated a significant improvement of knee flexion after a 6-week mental training  program  supplemented  with  mirror  visual  feedback  (41).  The  incorporation  of  a  mental  practice-only  condition  into the experimental design still needs to confirm a positive effect attributable to mental practice alone. The  effects  of  mental  practice  on  range  of  motion  of  the  upper extremity have been reported only in a randomized con-trolled trials during immobilization after flexor tendon repair (32). A 6-week mental practice program showed no significant influence on the active motion of the fingers. This might have been due to differences in the assessment procedure and the content of the intervention. The intervention focused on the flexion of the fingers and the wrist. The measurement criteria were the mean total motion per hand, calculated by the range of motion of all joints of 4 fingers. Moseley & Barnett (42) propose  not  using  single  and  simple  motor  tasks,  but  using  a  variety  of  mental  movements  including  activities  of  daily  living (ADl). This study has several limitations that must be considered. As  mentioned  above,  the  participants  were  living  in  social  circumstances that allowed the wearing of a forearm cast for 3 weeks. Although this recruitment could have led to bias in the  results,  it  was  indispensable  for  practical  reasons.  The  possibility  that  participants  contracted  their  muscles  during  mental  practice  sessions,  or  even  consciously  as  isometric  contractions, cannot be fully eliminated. An exclusion of this confounder  would  have  only  been  possible  by  permanently  applying an electromyogram measurement. From a methodo-logical point of view this would not have been possible. The fact that the casts applied to both groups were identical is likely to limit the impact of any non-specific muscular contraction that occurred during immobilization. Another potential confounder is a contralateral effect. Par-ticipants in the mental practice condition were initially asked to  execute  the  movement  with  the  right,  non-immobilized  wrist  (contralateral  physical  training;  Fig.  2).  Subsequently,  they systematically rehearsed alternating contralateral physical training (with open and closed eyes) with mental practice of the left hand. Ninety percent of the runs were executed men-tally and 10% physically. This procedure aimed to support the development of movement imagination, to stabilize a memory trace after the initial acquisition of the wrist movement, and to differentiate the motor representations. Data in the rehabilita-tion  context  report  better  adherence  and  learning  effects  by  combining physical execution and mental rehearsal trials (34). Furthermore, it was difficult to control the participants’ compliance in the mental practice group. This may have led to  an  underestimation  of  the  effects  of  mental  practice.  We  tried to overcome this problem by asking each participant to keep a paper training-diary of the regularity of this indepen-dent training.As we used a quasi-experimental design with an “untreated” control group in this pilot study, we cannot attribute the posi-tive effects found only to the imagination trials of the training program.  As  Mental  gait  Training  also  integrates  phases  of  movements with the non-affected limb, this might have influ-enced the results obtained. Therefore, further studies should use an active control group, sharing more commonalities with the mental practice group. The observations reported above make it impossible to draw the firm conclusion that mental practice reduces the loss of range of motion of the radiocarpal joint resulting from forearm immobilization.  Despite  the  limitations  of  the  present  study  we consider the use of mental practice to optimize the range of motion after immobilization useful. Compared  with  the  empirical  evidence  for  orthopedic  rehabilitation, the additional benefit of mental practice as an adjunct to physiotherapy or occupational therapy in neu-rological rehabilitation has been discussed and evaluated for a  multitude  of  diseases  (22,  24).  Current  evidence  provided  by systematic review articles (21) reporting medium to high effect  sizes  (EScorrected) 0.5–0.8 (43), support the efficacy of mental practice after stroke. From the orthopedic point of view examination  of  this  neurological  domain  would  be  valuable  because of the comorbidity, particularly of elderly patients, in orthopedic rehabilitation.To our knowledge, the present study is the first attempt to evaluate the effect of mental practice on range of motion after immobilization of the wrist of healthy persons. This paradigm was developed to imitate a distal radial fracture. Wrist fractures in older persons have a high occurrence rate coupled with a poor  outcome.  Therefore,  further  research  into  the  role  of  mental practice in this patient group is justified. Aging of the population will lead to increasing numbers of osteoporotic  fractures  of  the  wrist,  but  also  of  the  humerus,  spine, or hip (44, 45). Einsiedel et al. (46) demonstrated that the risk of losing autonomy after a wrist fracture is almost as high as after a hip fracture. This is partly related to upper extremity dysfunctions  with  ADl,  such  as  dressing,  washing  and  eat-ing. Post-fracture strategies tackling the problems mentioned above,  might  reduce  negative  outcomes  and  considerably  improve  quality  of  life.  So  far,  no  proactive  strategies  have  been published that counteract the immobilization problems. Because of the expected clinical benefits of preventing the loss of hand function that occurs during immobilization, and because  of  the  low  cost  and  simple  application  of  the  inter-vention, further research into the effects of mental practice in orthopedic rehabilitation is warranted.Conclusions about the efficacy and the effectiveness of men-tal practice during immobilization should be drawn integrating 3 different levels of measures. First, one should focus on the motor performance. The assessment of hand function should include functional measures and kinematic analysis of move-ments. Imaging and quantification of forearm muscles will al-low a better understanding of the association of muscle atrophy and hand function. Secondly, it will be interesting to focus on psychological variables, such as age-adjusted imagery ability, capacity of working memory, and the individual representa-tion of movements. Finally, future work should assess central processes  by  using  functional  and  structural  neuroimaging.  Indicators  of  central  control  processes,  such  as  preparation  time of movements, might be useful in interpreting the findings. given the incidence of wrist fractures and the demographic megatrends it is important to determine whether mental prac-tice is effective in improving outcome in older persons. This aspect should be studied first in pilot studies with the main target groups and then in controlled, follow-up designed trials with adequate power. 
