Effect of Prior Diagnoses on Dermatopathologists’ Interpretations of Melanocytic Lesions
Introduction
Obtaining second opinions is common in medicine and has been associated with improved quality of care and patient outcomes, including for cancer diagnoses.1,2,3 Annually, more than a million secondary pathology and radiology interpretations are billed to Medicare, with an untold number of unbilled courtesy second opinions offered by local practice and/or constrained by insurance payment restrictions.4,5,6 While some have studied the overall association of second opinions with reduction in diagnostic errors,7 little research has been conducted on the methods for obtaining these second opinions. The availability and severity of first diagnoses when physicians provide second opinions may unwittingly influence their diagnostic process.

In our clinical experience, consulting physicians are not typically blinded to the prior diagnosis (herein we define a prior diagnosis as that given by the initial or first physician). Overreliance on prior diagnostic information can constrain a physician’s review and diagnosis, a phenomenon known as anchoring bias.8 We hypothesize that knowledge of the prior physician’s diagnosis influences physicians’ diagnostic decisions when providing second opinions, and that this influence can potentially be harmful when leading a pathologist away from an accurate diagnosis.3,9

We studied the effect of prior diagnostic information on the diagnosis of melanocytic lesions because these lesions are challenging to interpret and have a high rate of diagnostic errors.10,11 For example, a large nationwide study found that diagnoses ranging from moderately dysplastic nevi to early-stage invasive melanoma were neither reproducible nor accurate. Intraobserver reproducibility for these diagnoses ranged from 35% to 63%, and accuracy compared with a consensus reference ranged from 25% to 43%.11

We designed a study to measure the extent to which dermatopathologists’ diagnoses are influenced by receiving prior diagnostic information from another dermatopathologist.

Go to:
Methods
Study Cases
We selected 90 cases from the Melanoma Pathology Study using the Melanocytic Pathology Assessment Tool and Hierarchy for Diagnosis (MPATH-Dx) classification system (see eMethods and eTable 1 in the Supplement for details and case characteristics).11 The MPATH-Dx system arranges a broad array of diagnostic terms11,12,13,14 into classes ranging from benign or mildly dysplastic nevi (class I) to fully malignant invasive melanoma (class V), with each class associated with suggested treatments. We randomly allocated the 90 cases into 5 sets of 18 cases via permuted block randomization to achieve balance across sets with respect to MPATH-Dx class (I-V) and diagnostic difficulty. A consensus panel of 3 dermatopathologists with expertise in melanocytic lesions (M.W.P., R.L.B., D.E.E.) independently reviewed each case, followed by a modified Delphi approach to achieve 100% consensus on all cases; the consensus process is described in greater detail elsewhere.12,13 This consensus information was used only in an analysis examining cases correctly diagnosed in phase 1 of the study.

Participating Dermatopathologists
Eligible dermatopathologists must have been currently practicing in the US, completed board certification and/or fellowship training in dermatopathology, interpreted melanocytic skin lesions for at least 1 year, and intended to continue interpreting melanocytic skin lesions for at least 2 years. Among 226 eligible dermatopathologists, 149 (66%) agreed to participate and completed both phases of review (eFigure 1 in the Supplement).

Data Collection
After completing informed consent and a baseline survey regarding demographic and clinical practice characteristics, participants were randomly assigned a slide set. Participants completed interpretations using their own microscopes. After a washout period of 12 to 24 months, participants reviewed the same cases in phase 2. Participants were not told that they were interpreting the same cases in phases 1 and 2. Sets of original hematoxylin-eosin stain glass slides were mailed to participants in turn, and data collection took place from August 2018 to March 2021.

Given previous findings suggesting influence of case order on interpretations,15 we designed the study so that the only difference between the phases was the randomized exposure to a prior diagnosis of the case. For this reason, each dermatopathologist received cases in a different random order, but an individual dermatopathologist’s random order in phase 1 was preserved for phase 2. For each case, participants were provided with the following clinical history: patient age, patient sex, biopsy site, and specimen type (shave, punch biopsy, or excisional).

Dermatopathologists reported their interpretations in an online histology form. Dermatopathologists who completed both phases and an online educational course that provided individualized feedback received up to 25 hours of American Medical Association Physician’s Recognition Award Category 1 continuing medical education credits.

Randomized Exposure to a Prior Diagnosis
In phase 1, dermatopathologists interpreted cases without any prior diagnoses (PDs). During phase 2, a diagnosis from an experienced board-certified and/or fellowship-trained dermatopathologist was made available for some cases. Each PD was selected to differ from the participant’s own phase 1 interpretation. Specifically, a displayed PD was always in a more severe (PD+) or less severe (PD-) diagnostic class than the participant’s phase 1 interpretation. Each phase 2 case was randomly assigned to 1 of 3 conditions: PD+, PD-, and PD-absent (the control condition, in which the participant did not receive a PD for that case). Cases were assigned to different PD conditions in phase 2 for different participants.

For a given case, depending on a dermatopathologist’s phase 1 interpretation, prior diagnoses in a higher or lower MPATH-Dx class might not be possible. For example, for cases diagnosed as class I, the lowest diagnostic class possible, only a PD-absent or PD+ is possible, and for cases diagnosed as class V, the highest diagnostic class possible, only a PD-absent or PD- is possible. The specific PDs displayed were randomly selected from the set of all eligible PD diagnoses (see eMethods in the Supplement for details).

For each case randomized to PD+ or PD-, participants saw the following pop-up message in the online histology reporting form: “First reviewer diagnosis: An experienced board certified and/or fellowship trained US dermatopathologist previously diagnosed this case, using the same glass slide (or a sequential cut if the original had faded), as follows: [auto insertion of diagnosis here].” The diagnosis, subtype, and MPATH-Dx class were provided, in addition to histological features for invasive melanoma cases (Figure 1). The pop-up messages had to be closed on the dermatopathologists’ screen before they could complete the histology form. Dermatopathologists were able to return and view the PD at any time during case review. For cases in phase 2 randomized to the control condition, PD-absent, the pop-up message indicated that the PD was not available for the case.
Analytic Strategy
This study had 2 primary aims: to assess the effect of a prior diagnosis in influencing dermatopathologists (1) to give a more severe (higher) diagnosis, and (2) to give a less severe (lower) diagnosis. The unit of analysis was a pair of diagnoses of a case by the same dermatopathologist in phases 1 and 2. For analysis of the potential for a prior diagnosis to influence a dermatopathologist toward a higher diagnosis, a case must have been eligible for randomization to PD+ in phase 2 to be included, and to have been randomized to either PD+ or PD-absent. Analysis compared the rate of higher diagnosis in phase 2 compared with phase 1, contrasting cases that were presented with PD+ to those presented as PD-absent (“prior diagnosis not available”) in phase 2. For the regression analysis, the binary outcome was whether the phase 2 diagnosis of a case was in a higher diagnostic category than the phase 1 diagnosis. The exposure of interest was a binary variable indicating that the dermatopathologist viewed a prior diagnosis for the case in a higher diagnostic class in phase 2, and analyses adjusted for the phase 1 diagnosis of a case. We used Poisson regression with robust standard error estimates and treated interpretations from individual dermatopathologists as clusters (see eMethods in the Supplement for details).16,17 As a sensitivity analysis, we also performed the relative risk (RR) regression using a binomial distribution and log link. We performed the analogous analysis for the outcome that a prior diagnosis could influence dermatopathologists toward a lower diagnosis in phase 2. In subsequent analyses, we assessed whether presentation of an inaccurate prior diagnosis could influence dermatopathologists away from an accurate phase 1 diagnosis.

SAS, version 9.4 (SAS Institute) was used for all analyses, and we evaluated statistical significance at P < .05. All procedures were Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act compliant and approved by the institutional review boards of the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center and the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA.

Go to:
Results
A total of 149 dermatopathologists provided 5322 interpretations of study cases. Dermatopathologists’ characteristics are shown in Table 1. Participants were broadly distributed geographically around the US. About half reported no affiliation with an academic medical center (71 [48%]), with 50 (34%) completing a residency in dermatology and 70 (47%) reporting that greater than 25% of their caseload was interpreting melanocytic skin lesions.
A baseline survey queried participants’ clinical experience and perceptions on second opinions (Table 2). Of the 149 dermatopathologists, most agreed that second opinions help reduce misdiagnoses and overdiagnosis and protect them from medical malpractice. When providing second opinions in their own clinical practice, most preferred to receive the initial pathologist’s diagnosis (126 [85%]) and to read the prior pathologist’s diagnosis before finalizing their own diagnosis (132 [89%]). No participant reported being “greatly influenced” by the initial pathologist’s diagnosis when giving a second opinion in clinical practice. However, 103 (69%) reported they are “somewhat influenced,” with the remaining 46 (31%) reporting that they are “not at all influenced.”
Figure 1 illustrates the study design by providing examples of the phase 2 prior diagnostic information shown to participants and the resultant phase 2 interpretations for all cases diagnosed as a class III (eg, melanoma in situ) in phase 1. Cases presented without prior diagnostic information in phase 2 serve as the comparison group to account for background intrarater variability. In the 265 instances when dermatopathologists were provided with a prior diagnosis that was lower than a class III, 103 (39%) of phase 2 diagnoses were in a lower class compared with phase 1 diagnoses. Similarly, in the 203 instances when dermatopathologists were presented with a more severe (higher) prior diagnosis, 107 (53%) of phase 2 diagnoses were in a higher class compared with phase 1 diagnoses.

Figure 2 provides results stratified by the phase 1 diagnostic class and highlights how the diagnoses shifted in phase 2 in both directions when prior diagnostic information was provided.
Dermatopathologists were significantly swayed by prior diagnoses to both higher and lower diagnoses (Figure 3). The chance of giving a lower diagnosis was 1.38 times higher when the prior diagnoses were lower compared with when no prior diagnosis information was provided (RR, 1.38; 95% CI, 1.19-1.59); likewise, the chance of giving a higher diagnosis was 1.52 times higher when a more severe prior diagnosis was provided (RR, 1.52; 95% CI, 1.34-1.73). Nearly identical RRs were found using a binomial model with log link (eTable 2 in the Supplement). Results were similar when restricted to the 46 (31%) participants who stated in the baseline survey that they are not influenced at all by the direction of an initial pathologist’s diagnosis in their own clinical practice. Results were also similar for the 32 (21%) participants who report that they act as consulting reviewer by providing second opinions for 20% or more of cases in their clinical practice. Importantly, results were also similar when restricted to the 47% of phase 1 interpretations that were accurate. That is, even when dermatopathologists’ phase 1 diagnoses agreed with the consensus reference diagnosis of an expert panel, they were swayed away from the correct diagnosis in phase 2.
The effect of prior diagnoses did not significantly differ by dermatopathologists’ years of experience interpreting melanocytic skin lesions. Even participants reporting at the end of the study that they were “never or rarely influenced” by the prior diagnosis information presented during phase 2 showed evidence of sway (see eTable 3 and eFigure 2 in the Supplement).

Go to:
Discussion
While medical practice has long incorporated second opinions, the potential influence of antecedent diagnostic information has never been systematically studied to our knowledge. A lack of research on second opinions may reflect the challenges in studying the topic. We present an innovative scientific design to evaluate how knowledge of a prior physician’s diagnosis influences the physician providing the second opinion consultation. A substantial effect was noted in both directions. When a prior diagnosis states a less concerning class of disease, it influences the physician providing the second opinion toward a less severe diagnosis. Conversely, when a prior diagnosis states a more concerning class of disease, the physician is more likely to diagnose a higher class of disease. Notably, the subgroup of physicians who reported in the baseline survey that they are not influenced by prior diagnostic information in their own clinical practice were also noted to be swayed by this information.

Most concerning, prior diagnostic information influenced physicians even when their initial diagnoses were accurate. When a physician is swayed to a more severe diagnosis, this would tend to lead to overtreatment for the patient. Conversely, when a physician is swayed to a less severe diagnosis, this would tend to lead to undertreatment for the patient. Both overtreatment and undertreatment adversely affect patient care and harm patients.

When an individual is exposed to plausible information early in a decision-making process, that information can strongly influence results.9,18 Psychologists refer to the early information as an anchor because it can cause individuals to develop an initial hypothesis that is particularly difficult to deviate from.18,19 Cognitive errors such as anchoring bias are thought to underlie at least 75% of all errors involving diagnostic decisions.20,21 In some instances, such as when a second opinion sways between classes I and II, patient care may not be meaningfully affected. However, we noted a striking effect of prior diagnostic information causing upward and downward shifts between classes III and IV and between classes IV and V, which can lead to altered decisions about patient care, including surgical, therapeutic, and monitoring decisions.

The amount of diagnostic sway noted in this study may be a conservative estimate for 3 reasons. First, even though we did not inform participants that they would be seeing the same cases in phase 2, it is possible that they suspected that this was part of the design and therefore saved notes from phase 1 case reviews that might then lead them to ignore the prior diagnostic information. Second, while in practice dermatopathologists may be motivated to reach consensus with a colleague and concur with the first dermatopathologist’s opinion, it is possible that dermatopathologists would be less influenced in a testing situation. Third, the participants were all experienced board-certified and/or fellowship-trained dermatopathologists with high confidence in interpreting melanocytic lesions compared with general pathologists (see eTable 4 in the Supplement); one might expect more sway from less experienced clinicians.22

Strengths and Limitations
Our novel study design incorporates unique strengths, the most compelling of which is the random assignment of exposure to a prior physician’s diagnosis in phase 2 vs control condition, thus enabling a causal conclusion about the effect of knowledge of a prior diagnosis. Using the participants’ own initial phase 1 diagnosis as the comparator to assess their phase 2 interpretations enhanced statistical power. An additional strength is use of actual prior diagnoses obtained from experienced, practicing US dermatopathologists who had previously interpreted the same cases.

While the testing situation of this study can be viewed as a limitation, it also is a strength in that many conditions were controlled (eg, multiple interpretations by many dermatopathologists using the same glass slides). Completing a study of this size and diversity is not feasible in an actual clinical setting. While the prior diagnoses were obtained from board-certified/fellowship-trained dermatopathologists, reinforcing credibility, results may not generalize to practice settings where initial opinions might originate from a general pathologist without specialty training. Further research is needed to examine whether these findings generalize to other fields in medicine. Finally, although we provided standardized clinical information on cases reviewed (such as patient age and sex, biopsy site, and specimen type), we were unable to provide information to participants on all clinical history variables (such as recent change in size of lesion, history of melanoma, and level of concern by the referring physician).

Go to:
Conclusions
In this randomized controlled trial, dermatopathologists were influenced by prior diagnostic information when giving second opinions. Although most dermatopathologists prefer to receive prior diagnoses when providing second opinions, this information can sway them away from a correct diagnosis to an incorrect diagnosis. The adage “two heads are better than one” should be carefully considered in the context of medical decision-making—we need to consider and refine the methods of how these two heads come together. The extensive amount of sway noted in this study highlights the complexities of the diagnostic processes.