Prospective trial of the detection of urolithiasis on ultralow dose (sub mSv) noncontrast computerized tomography: direct comparison against routine low dose reference standard
Introduction
Urolithiasis is a prevalent condition,1 for which non-contrast computed tomography (CT) remains the diagnostic imaging gold standard.2, 3 Overall, the use of CT continues to rise in the U.S. and elsewhere.4 The theoretical increased risk of malignancy at the population level due to medical imaging,5 albeit extremely small, has led to the prioritization of dose reduction in diagnostic CT. The inevitable trade-off for reduced dose at CT is reduced image quality. However, recent research has targeted methods for reducing radiation dose while maintaining diagnostic image quality, largely focused on novel iterative algorithms for reconstructing CT data acquired at very low doses. Most studies to date have typically compared these algorithms to the standard filtered back-projection (FBP) method.

The first generation of commercially-available iterative reconstruction methods allowed for moderate dose reduction and includes adaptive statistical iterative reconstruction (ASIR, GE Healthcare), among others. ASIR has been shown to have the potential to decrease dose an estimated 25-40%.6-8 Newer and more powerful algorithms currently under investigation include model-based iterative reconstruction (MBIR),9, 10 which allows for more aggressive dose reduction to sub-milliSievert (mSv) levels for non-contrast CT. This represents a substantial dose reduction when compared to the published effective doses of approximately 3-8 mSv for current routine low-dose non-contrast CT for urolithiasis.11, 12 By comparison, a 2-view KUB radiographic study has an effective dose of about 1.2-1.4 mSv on average.13, 14

The imaging characteristics of urolithiasis make non-contrast CT an ideal application of ultra-low dose protocols. Performance data for ultra-low-dose CT in the setting of urolithiasis is largely lacking, as most studies have largely focused on image noise or subjective image quality. 15-18 Other studies have suggested that ultra-low-dose CT is effective in detecting urolithiasis, but have relied on artificial image noise,19 cadaveric models,20 or clinical follow-up without direct comparison to routine low-dose CT.21

The purpose of this prospective trial was to compare the diagnostic performance of ultra-low-dose CT using three different reconstruction algorithms (ASIR, MBIR, and FBP) to concurrent routine low-dose non-contrast CT for the detection of urolithiasis.

Go to:
Methods
This HIPAA-compliant prospective study was IRB approved and all subjects provided signed informed consent.

Patient Population
Between March 2011 and March 2013, 48 adult patients (mean age 55.9±10.4 years, M:F 24:24) were enrolled. Mean patient BMI was 27.8±4.8 kg/m2. Inclusion criteria included adult outpatient men and non-pregnant women for whom non-contrast CT examination was clinically warranted for nonacute evaluation of urolithiasis (n=18). Patients undergoing non-contrast CT colonography (n=30) were also included to provide more cases without stones for specificity assessment.

CT Protocol
All studies were performed on our dedicated research 64-slice MDCT scanner (Discovery CT750 HD, GE Healthcare). Parameters included 120 kVp and tube current modulation (Smart mA, GE Healthcare) with noise index ranging up to 50 for the routine low-dose series. Images were reconstructed with a slice thickness of 2.5 mm at 1.25 mm intervals in transverse (axial) and coronal planes. All patients first underwent routine low-dose non-contrast CT examination of the abdomen and pelvis followed immediately by an ultra-low-dose series acquisition with matching coverage targeted at 70-90% dose reduction from the initial series, typically in the sub-mSv range. Targeted dose reduction was achieved by adjustments in tube current range, noise index, and slice thickness.

CT Image Reconstruction and Analysis
The routine low-dose series for each patient was reconstructed using FBP and all images were independently reviewed for calculi by three experienced board-certified abdominal radiologists (PJP, DHK, MGL). The number, location, and maximum diameter of stones were determined for each patient. After independent review, any discrepancies were revisited and consensus was achieved among the reviewers. The final routine low-dose interpretations served as the reference standard.

The ultra-low-dose series for each patient was reconstructed in axial and coronal planes using three different reconstruction algorithms: FBP, ASIR, and MBIR. All ultra-low-dose images were reviewed by three relatively inexperienced trainee readers: a first-year Radiology Resident, Urology Fellow, and Abdominal Imaging Fellow (BDP, SS, EMR). The readers were blinded to the specific reconstruction algorithm, which were provided in randomized order per patient. A washout period of at least one week was inserted between each series review to minimize recall bias. All ultra-low-dose series (three per patient) were ultimately evaluated by each reader for the number, location, and size of stones, and results were compared against the routine low-dose reference standard. Calculi were considered a true-positive when matched by both size (within 50%) and location (within 2 axial slices) with the reference standard. Data from the three readers was pooled for analysis, performed at varying size thresholds.

Performance measures were calculated on a per-patient and per-stone basis. For the patient-level analysis, a true-positive required at least one matching calculus at or exceeding the given size threshold. Emphasis was placed on a 4-mm size threshold for comparing performance among the different ultra-low-dose reconstructions. This threshold was utilized in part because it represents a lower bound for most interventions, with spontaneous passage rates as high as 95% for smaller calculi.22, 23

CT doses are reported as the CT dose index (CTDIvol). Effective dose measurements (in mSv) were calculated from the dose-length product (DLP), multiplied by the conversion factor of 0.015 mSv/mGy × cm) recommended by the AAPM24 and verified by Deak, et al.25

Statistical Analysis
The modified Wald method was used to calculate confidence intervals for proportions. Fisher's exact test was used to test for differences in categorical variables and Student's t-test was used to test for differences in continuous variables. A two-tailed p-value <0.05 was used as the criterion for statistical significance.

Go to:
Results
The mean CTDIvol for the routine low-dose series was 6.5±5.3 mGy. The mean CTDIvol for the ultra-low-dose series was 1.4±1.1 mGy, representing a mean reduction of 5.1±4.4 mGy, or 78%±5% reduction on average. The mean effective dose for the routine low-dose and ultra-low-dose CT series was 4.5±3.5 mSv (median 3.8 mSv) and 0.91±0.72 mSv (median 0.82 mSv), respectively. 77% (37/48) of ultra-low-dose series were in the sub-mSv range. These results are summarized in Table 1. Mean effective dose for obese patients (BMI =30 kg/m2, N=18) was significantly higher than for non-obese patients (BMI <30 kg/m2, N=30) at ultra-low-dose CT (1.3 vs 0.67 mSv, p=0.001) and routine low-dose CT (6.3 vs 3.5 mSv, p=0.006). Mean dose reduction was similar between the two groups (78% vs 79%, p=0.56).
According to the routine low-dose reference standard, the 48 patients had 82 total calculi =2 mm in diameter, 48 =3 mm, 29 =4 mm, and 17 =5 mm. The number of patients having at least one stone identified at these thresholds was 20/48 (42%) for =2 mm, 17/48 (35%) for =3 mm, 15/48 (31%) for =4 mm, and 11/48 (23%) for =5 mm. Per-stone and per-patient overall performance measures for each reconstructions and all readers at positivity thresholds of =2 mm, =3 mm, =4 mm, and =5 mm are listed in Table 2. A total of 15/18 patients whose indication for CT was suspected urolithiasis and 5/30 patients undergoing CTC had at least one stone =2 mm identified.
Based on these data, analysis of individual ultra-low-dose reconstruction algorithms was performed at a size positivity threshold of =4 mm, as performance measures in this study were not seen to improve significantly at thresholds greater than 4 mm. Pooled per-stone sensitivity and PPV for all ultra-low-dose reconstructions at a positivity threshold of =4 mm were 0.91 [CI 0.87-0.94] and 0.98 [CI 0.95-0.99], respectively. Overall per-patient sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV, and accuracy for all ultra-low-dose reconstructions at a positivity threshold of =4mm were 0.87 [0.80-0.92], 1.00 [0.99-1.00], 1.00 [0.96-1.00], 0.94 [0.90-0.96], and 0.96 [0.93-0.97], respectively. At a positivity threshold of =4 mm, there was no difference in performance between obese and non-obese patients with per-patient sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV, and accuracy equivalent for both groups at 0.87/1.00/1.00/0.96/0.97, with p=1.00 for all metrics.

Analyzed by ultra-low-dose reconstruction algorithm, the per-stone sensitivity and PPV were 0.89/0.96 for FBP, 0.91/0.98 for ASIR, and 0.93/1.00 for MBIR. At a size positivity threshold of =4 mm, the per-patient sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV, and accuracy were 0.82/1.00/1.00/0.91/0.94 for FBP, 0.85/1.00/1.00/0.93/0.95 for ASIR, and 0.94/1.00/1.00/0.97/0.98 for MBIR, respectively. These data, including confidence intervals, are summarized in Table 3. Virtually no difference in per-patient accuracy was seen between ASIR and FBP (0.95 vs 0.94, p=0.80), while a small difference was seen between MBIR and FBP (0.98 vs 0.94, p=0.14), which was not statistically significant. The total number of false-positive (Figure 1) and false-negative (Figure 2) stone detections =4 mm for the three readers (out of 238 total pooled true-positive detections) was 3 and 10 for ultra-low-dose FBP, 2 and 8 for ultra-low-dose ASIR, and 0 and 6 for ultra-low-dose MBIR.
Coronal images (Figure 3) were subjectively reported by the readers to improve the diagnostic accuracy in 49% (212/432) of ultra-low-dose interpretations in this series. Additionally, readers reported that the coronal images caused the final read to be changed in 13% (56/432) of ultra-low-dose interpretations.
Discussion
As unenhanced CT remains the gold standard in diagnosis and evaluation of urolithiasis, the continued pursuit of novel methods for further lowering CT radiation dose without significantly impacting performance is an important goal. Regardless of whether the actual health risks related to medical radiation are real or perceived,26 it is incumbent upon the health care system to limit exposures to as low as reasonably achievable for accurate diagnosis. Non-contrast CT for urolithiasis is an ideal target for substantial dose reduction, as patients are often younger and may be imaged multiple times over many years. In addition, the dense composition of urinary calculi allow for relatively easy detection at CT compared with low-contrast lesions within the solid abdominal organs. Prior work has shown that stone detection at CT is preserved with moderate dose reduction.27 To our knowledge, this study represents the first prospective attempt at evaluating the performance of ultra-low-dose non-contrast CT on the order of 1 mSv for the detection of urolithiasis. This builds upon prior cadaveric studies, phantom studies, and studies introducing artificial noise into routine low dose CT scans, and represents a necessary step towards validation.

Our study demonstrates an overall accuracy of greater than 95% for ultra-low-dose CT in the detection of urolithiasis for stones = 4 mm in diameter when compared to the routine low-dose series, while achieving a radiation dose reduction of nearly 80%, including a majority that were less than 1 mSv (0.91 mSv effective dose on average). Stones <4 mm commonly pass, and small stones of clinical significance are often associated with hydronephrosis or other evidence of obstruction, which would generally prompt further study. Our reported mean effective CT dose is less than a typical 2-view KUB study.13, 14 This raises the possibility of ultra-low-dose CT for stone surveillance in lieu of conventional radiography, which would eliminate the uncertainty associated with KUB evaluation. This would of course require a reduced charge for CT to be cost-effective. Obese patients (BMI =30) received a slightly higher radiation dose than non-obese patients (BMI <30) at both routine low-dose and ultra-low dose-CT, but no difference in dose reduction; this is not surprising given that dose in our study was automatically modulated to maintain a consistent noise index. As such, no difference was seen between obese patients and non-obese patients with regard ultra-low-dose CT in stone detection.

A substantial effort in lowering CT radiation dose further has largely centered more sophisticated iterative reconstruction algorithms, such as MBIR. While prior studies have shown a subjective improvement in image quality with newer iterative reconstruction techniques (e.g. MBIR), there has been some question as to whether such differences would translate into meaningful differences in clinical diagnosis. Our study indicated virtually no improvement with ASIR over FBP at these aggressive reduction levels, with only a 1% difference in accuracy. However, an improvement in accuracy of 4% was seen with MBIR over FBP. Although this difference was not statistically significant (p=0.14) due to the relatively small sample size, this difference would most likely become significant with a larger sample size. Figures 1 and ?and22 highlight the difference among these reconstructions. Figure 1 demonstrates an apparent 2-mm density was falsely called a stone by all three readers on ultra-low-dose FBP and ASIR, but not on MBIR. Conversely, Figure 2 demonstrates a 5-mm stone that was correctly identified by all readers on ultra-low-dose MBIR, but was missed by 2 of 3 readers on the ultra-low-dose FBP and ASIR series.

Supplementary data gathered by the authors of this study indicate that review of the coronal reconstructions subjectively improved interpretation in nearly half of cases, corroborating prior studies of routine low-dose CT showing improved evaluation with coronal projections.28 In some cases, coronal review actually changed the final diagnosis in our series. These data support the routine use of coronal images when evaluating ultra-low-dose non-contrast CT for urolithiasis, which is our current standard of practice.

We acknowledge limitations to our study. Our patients were recruited from the non-urgent/non-emergent outpatient setting, so generalization to the acute setting may be limited. Given the relative novelty of this subject, broadly accepted standard imaging protocols for ultra-low-dose CT do not yet exist. Furthermore, results may differ when other iterative reconstruction methods are applied. We did not include an assessment of distal ureteral calculi, but cadaveric work suggests that detection remains strong at low doses.20 We did not investigate whether linear stone size or stone volume at CT was affected by the ultra-low-dose technique or reconstruction algorithm.18, 29, 30 We elected to focus on a stone size threshold of 4 mm; the performance of ultra-low-dose CT begins to fall under 90% for stones less than 3 mm in diameter. However, one aspect of this study which likely underestimated the accuracy of ultra-low-dose CT for urolithiasis detection was that the readers were relatively inexperienced trainees. While more experienced readers would presumably be more accurate, the actual performance of ultra-low-dose CT in the hands of experienced readers remains unknown. Furthermore, the matching algorithm was quite stringent and at least some detected stones were likely misclassified as false-positives or false-negatives due to a variety of confounding factors.

In conclusion, our study suggests that by using advanced ultra-low-dose iterative reconstruction algorithms, it is feasible to reduce radiation dose at non-contrast CT to a level below that of a typical 2-view KUB while still maintaining adequate diagnostic accuracy for the detection of clinically significant urolithiasis. Our study suggested a mild improvement in diagnostic performance of the newer MBIR algorithm over ASIR and FBP when compared against routine low-dose CT examinations, which did not meet statistical significance in this relatively small cohort. Additionally, review of the coronal images was found to be helpful in evaluating ultra-low-dose series for urolithiasis.