Introduction
The prevalence of type 2 diabetes in the USA ranges from 22% to 33% in older adults (aged ≥65 years) and is around two-times higher than in the overall adult population (15% for adults aged ≥18 years).1,  2 Older adults with type 2 diabetes often have multiple comorbidities and develop cardiovascular complications, heart failure, and kidney dysfunction at increased rates compared with younger adults,1,  3 with up to 40% having at least four comorbid diseases.4,  5 Given these clinical challenges, it is important to determine the safety and efficacy profile of antihyperglycaemic medications among older adults with type 2 diabetes. Specifically, the sodium glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitor class of antihyperglycaemic medications improves glycaemic control and decreases cardiorenal risk, bodyweight, and blood pressure.6,  7,  8,  9 Although SGLT2 inhibitors have a favourable safety profile,6,  7,  8 it is important to understand their benefit–risk balance in older adults, who might be particularly prone to the adverse effects of hypoglycaemia, hypovolaemia, and hypotension.10
Accordingly, we aimed to determine the efficacy and safety profile of ertugliflozin, an SGLT2 inhibitor, in older participants (including those aged ≥65 years and those ≥75 years) compared with younger participants enrolled in the VERTIS CV trial. Ertugliflozin is approved as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve glycaemic control in adults with type 2 diabetes. VERTIS CV was a cardiovascular outcomes trial to evaluate the cardiovascular efficacy and safety of ertugliflozin versus placebo in adults with type 2 diabetes and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease.9 The primary objective of VERTIS CV was to show non-inferiority of ertugliflozin to placebo with respect to the primary outcome, which was major adverse cardiovascular events (a composite of death from cardiovascular causes, non-fatal myocardial infarction, or non-fatal stroke).9 As VERTIS CV required participants to be at least 40 years of age, with no upper age limit,11 the study provided an opportunity to investigate cardiorenal outcomes and overall safety of ertugliflozin in a large group of older adults. Herein, we report the results of subgroup analyses of VERTIS CV by baseline age.
Methods
Study design and participants
VERTIS CV was a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group, multicentre trial at 567 centres in 34 countries (Argentina, Australia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Georgia, Greece, Hong Kong, Hungary, Israel, Italy, South Korea, Latvia, Lithuania, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, the Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, South Africa, Sweden, Taiwan, Thailand, Türkiye, Ukraine, the UK, and the USA).9 Patients were eligible for the study if they were at least 40 years of age and had type 2 diabetes (with a glycated haemoglobin of 7·0–10·5%) and established atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease involving the coronary, cerebrovascular, or peripheral arterial systems. Key exclusion criteria were a history of type 1 diabetes or ketoacidosis and an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) below 30 mL per minute per 1·73 m2 of body surface area.
The VERTIS CV trial was done in compliance with the ethical principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and in compliance with all International Conference on Harmonisation Good Clinical Practice Guidelines. The final protocol was reviewed and approved by the institutional review board or independent ethics committee at each investigational centre. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants.
The prespecified subgroup analyses reported herein examined the cardiorenal safety and tolerability of ertugliflozin by baseline age (≥65 years and <65 years), with additional post-hoc analyses by baseline age of 75 years and older and less than 75 years.
Randomisation and masking
The trial design has been previously reported.9 Briefly, random assignment was done at a central location with the use of an interactive voice-response system and was based on a computer-generated schedule with randomly permuted blocks of size six, stratified according to geographical region (Africa, Asia-Pacific, Europe [including Russia], North America [USA and Canada], and Latin America [including Mexico]). Eligible participants were randomly assigned (1:1:1) to one of two doses of ertugliflozin or placebo.
Procedures
Participants were assigned to oral, once-daily ertugliflozin 5 mg or 15 mg or placebo in addition to background standard-of-care treatment (anti-hyperglycaemic medication at the discretion of the investigator). Ertugliflozin was administered over a mean period of 2·9 years (SD 1·4), and placebo over a mean period of 2·8 years (1·4). The original protocol was finalised on Aug 25, 2013, and included a planned sample size of around 4000 patients. The protocol was amended on March 11, 2016, without knowledge of any interim results, to double the sample size to around 8000 patients and to include efficacy objectives for superiority with respect to cardiovascular and kidney outcomes. Cohort 1 comprised patients enrolled before the March, 2016 amendment and cohort 2 comprised those enrolled after the March, 2016 amendment. The protocol is available in the appendix (pp 3–137).
Outcomes
The primary efficacy and safety results for VERTIS CV have been published.9 Briefly, the primary analysis showed that ertugliflozin was non-inferior to placebo for the primary endpoint of major adverse cardiovascular events (a composite of death from cardiovascular causes, non-fatal myocardial infarction, or non-fatal stroke).9 Superiority of ertugliflozin for the composite outcome of cardiovascular death or hospitalisation for heart failure, cardiovascular death (alone), and a kidney composite outcome (that included doubling of serum creatinine from baseline) was not met.9 The prespecified secondary outcome of hospitalisation for heart failure showed a 30% relative risk reduction with ertugliflozin versus placebo.9 A prespecified exploratory kidney composite outcome (sustained ≥40% decrease in eGFR from baseline, dialysis or transplantation, or kidney death) showed a 34% relative risk reduction with ertugliflozin versus placebo.12
In the present subgroup analyses, major adverse cardiovascular events were assessed as time to first occurrence of the composite outcome of cardiovascular death, non-fatal myocardial infarction, or non-fatal stroke. Secondary outcomes, also assessed as the time to first occurrence, included: the composite outcome of hospitalisation for heart failure or cardiovascular death; cardiovascular death; a kidney composite outcome that included death due to kidney-related causes, kidney replacement therapy, or doubling of serum creatinine; and a prespecified exploratory kidney composite outcome of sustained 40% or greater decrease in eGFR from baseline, chronic kidney dialysis or transplantation, or death due to kidney-related causes.12 The origin and start time was the date of random assignment and the time to event was censored at the date of last dose of study drug plus 365 days.9 Additionally, eGFR and urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio change from baseline over time were assessed descriptively. All the primary and secondary outcome events were centrally adjudicated by an event adjudication committee in a masked manner.
Overall safety assessments included adverse events, serious adverse events, deaths, and discontinuations of investigational product because of adverse events. Prespecified adverse events of special interest (tier 1 adverse events) included genital mycotic infection by sex, urinary tract infection, and hypovolaemia. Other adverse events of special interest included hypoglycaemia, falls, fractures, and amputations. The Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (version 22.1) was used to classify all adverse events with respect to system organ class and preferred terms.
Statistical analysis
Data from the two ertugliflozin dose groups were pooled for the assessment of cardiorenal outcomes. Cardiorenal outcomes were compared for participants aged 65 years and older and those younger than 65 years (prespecified). Additional post-hoc analyses were done using data from participants aged 75 years and older and those younger than 75 years by use of the same statistical methodology as the prespecified analyses.
The major adverse cardiovascular events outcome and other cardiorenal outcomes were analysed by intention-to-treat analyses of data from all randomly assigned participants who received at least one dose of investigational product. For participants who discontinued the assigned trial regimen prematurely, major adverse cardiovascular events that occurred up to 365 days after the last confirmed dose were included in the primary analysis.9 Outcomes were analysed using stratified Cox proportional hazard models constructed to compare treatments, with adjustment for age subgroup. The model included treatment, age subgroup, and treatment-by-age subgroup as explanatory factors, with cohort as the stratification factor. The proportional hazards assumption was supported via testing the Schoenfeld residuals for non-zero slope over time. Testing boundaries and CIs were adjusted according to the actual α spent at the interim analysis, which was based on the actual numbers of events observed at the interim and final analyses in accordance with a Lan-DeMets O’Brien-Fleming spending function. An upper bound of a two-sided 95·6% CI for the hazard ratio (HR; ertugliflozin vs placebo) was used for the non-inferiority test. The key secondary endpoints (hospitalisation for heart failure or cardiovascular death, cardiovascular death, and the kidney composite) were analysed using Cox models with the same model terms as for the primary outcome. After adjustment for the interim analysis, two-sided 95·8% CIs for the HR were calculated based on the Cox model for each key secondary outcome. Other prespecified secondary efficacy outcomes included time to first occurrence of hospitalisation for heart failure. These other prespecified efficacy outcomes were analysed using Cox models with the same model terms as for the primary outcome. A point estimate and two-sided 95% CI for the HR were calculated based on the Cox model for each outcome.9 Interaction p values were determined for each outcome to evaluate for effect modification for the comparison of the pooled ertugliflozin group versus placebo.
Safety analyses included all randomly assigned participants who received at least one dose of ertugliflozin or placebo. Safety was analysed for age subgroups of 65 years and older and younger than 65 years and for age subgroups 75 years and older and younger than 75 years; the analyses were not designed to compare overall safety between age subgroups.
Summaries of adverse events included treatment-emergent adverse events according to treatment group. All safety analyses for adverse events included events that occurred within 14 days after the final dose of ertugliflozin or placebo. Fracture events were adjudicated in a masked manner by an independent committee.
Statistical analyses were done using SAS Unix software version 9.3. A clinical research organisation, Parexel International (Newton, MA, USA), selected and monitored the trial sites and managed and stored the data, with oversight from the sponsors. An independent, external data and safety monitoring committee monitored the interim unblinded data. VERTIS CV is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01986881.
Role of the funding source
The sponsors of the study (Merck Sharp & Dohme LLC, a subsidiary of Merck & Co, Inc, Rahway, NJ, USA, and Pfizer Inc, New York, NY, USA) designed and oversaw the conduct of the trial. All primary analyses were done by Parexel International in conjunction with an academic steering committee, and the results were independently confirmed by the sponsors with the use of original data. Editorial support was funded by Merck Sharp & Dohme LLC, a subsidiary of Merck & Co, Inc, Rahway, NJ, USA, in collaboration with Pfizer Inc, New York, NY, USA. The funder of the study had a role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report.
Results
Between Dec 13, 2013, and July 31, 2015, and between June 1, 2016, and April 14, 2017, 8246 adults with type 2 diabetes and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease were recruited to the study in two cohorts (4023 patients in cohort 1 and 4223 patients in cohort 2) and randomly assigned. 2752 were assigned to ertugliflozin 5 mg, 2747 to ertugliflozin 15 mg, and 2747 to placebo. 8238 participants received at least one dose of ertugliflozin 5 mg (2745 participants), ertugliflozin 15 mg (2746 participants), or placebo (2747 participants). 4145 (50·3%) of 8238 participants were aged 65 years and older, including 903 (11·0%) participants aged 75 years and older (appendix p 2). The mean duration of follow-up was 3·5 years (SD 1·4; median 3·0 years). 5764 (70·0%) of 8238 participants were male and 2474 (30·0%) were female, and 7233 (87·8%) of 8238 participants were White, 497 (6·0%) were Asian, 235 (2·9%) were Black, and 273 (3·3%) were classfied as other.
Notable differences were observed between age subgroups, including a longer duration of type 2 diabetes and a lower mean eGFR rate in older adults (both ≥65 years vs <65 years and ≥75 years vs <75 years; table 1). Mean glycolated haemoglobin, fasting plasma glucose, and BMI were also lower in older participants versus younger participants. Older participants also had a higher use of diuretics (including loop diuretics) and calcium channel blockers than did younger participants.

Cardiovascular outcomes were more common in older adults (≥65 years and ≥75 years) than younger adults (<65 years and <75 years; Figure 1, Figure 2). The effects of ertugliflozin on cardiorenal outcomes by age subgroup were consistent with results in the overall population; the effect on major adverse cardiovascular events, cardiovascular death or hospitalisation for heart failure, cardiovascular death, hospitalisation for heart failure, and the kidney composite outcomes with ertugliflozin versus placebo did not differ between the age subgroups of 65 years and older and younger than 65 years, with pinteraction>0·05 for all outcomes assessed (figure 1). As in the overall population, ertugliflozin versus placebo was associated with reductions in the risk of hospitalisation for heart failure (≥65 years: HR 0·72, 95% CI 0·52–0·99; <65 years: 0·66, 0·43–1·02), the prespecified kidney composite outcome of a doubling in serum creatinine (≥65 years: 0·84, 0·60–1·17; <65 years: 0·78, 0·55–1·10), and the prespecified exploratory kidney composite outcome of sustained eGFR reduction of at least 40% from baseline (≥65 years: 0·71, 0·47–1·09; <65 years: 0·62, 0·43–0·91), with no difference across age subgroups (pinteraction>0·05). Similar trends were also observed in the age subgroups 75 years and older and younger than 75 years (figure 2).

The overall pattern of eGFR changes with ertugliflozin versus placebo over the course of the study was consistent across age the subgroups of 65 years and older and younger than 65 years and the age subgroups 75 years and older and younger than 75 years (figure 3). An initial decline in eGFR was observed with ertugliflozin versus placebo with subsequent stabilisation; final eGFR levels at week 260 were higher with ertugliflozin versus placebo overall12 and in the older subgroups (≥65 years and ≥75 years; figure 3). Similarly, the pattern of urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio changes with ertugliflozin versus placebo over time was also consistent across age subgroups (figure 4). Ertugliflozin use resulted in an initial decline in the urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio, which remained lower than with placebo treatment up to week 260.

The overall incidence of adverse events and serious adverse events did not differ across the treatment groups within each age subgroup (table 2). The incidence of adverse events that resulted in discontinuation of investigational product did not differ and was low across treatment groups, although was slightly higher for the 65 years and older subgroup compared with the younger than 65 years subgroup (<10% of adults in any treatment group), and for the 75 years and older subgroup compared with the younger than 75 years subgroup. We found no meaningful differences across the different age groups in the incidence of death by treatment group.

The incidence of genital mycotic infections was higher with ertugliflozin than with placebo in men and women within every age subgroup (table 2). A higher incidence of urinary tract infection adverse events was observed with both ertugliflozin and placebo in the 65 and older and 75 and older subgroups compared with the younger groups. Urinary tract infection rates were nominally higher for each of the ertugliflozin dose groups than for the placebo group. However, the incidence of urinary tract infection serious adverse events did not differ across treatment groups or age subgroups. The incidences of kidney-related adverse events (including acute kidney injury) and hypovolaemia adverse events did not differ across treatment groups within each age subgroup (table 2). The proportions of adults with hypoglycaemia did not differ in those treated with ertugliflozin and placebo in all age subgroups. The proportion of adults who underwent amputation within each age subgroup was low. The incidence of falls and adjudication-confirmed fractures did not differ between treatment groups within each age group.
Discussion
In these analyses of the VERTIS CV randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, cardiovascular outcomes were more common in the older subgroups compared with the younger subgroups. The effects of ertugliflozin on cardiovascular and kidney outcomes did not differ between the subgroups of adults aged 65 years and older and younger than 65 years or between the subgroups of adults aged 75 years and older and younger than 75 years, with the results observed in the age subgroups consistent with those in the overall VERTIS CV population. In particular, the reduced risks of hospitalisation for heart failure and of the prespecified exploratory kidney composite outcome of at least a 40% sustained reduction in eGFR from baseline, chronic kidney dialysis or transplantation, or death due to kidney-related causes with ertugliflozin versus placebo in the overall VERTIS CV population were observed regardless of age subgroup.
Subgroup analyses by age have been done using data from other SGLT2 inhibitor cardiovascular outcome trials. In the EMPA-REG OUTCOME trial,6,  14 empagliflozin reduced the risk of cardiovascular death, hospitalisation for heart failure, and kidney outcomes compared with placebo in adults with type 2 diabetes who were at high risk for cardiovascular events.6,  14 In post-hoc analyses of the EMPA-REG OUTCOME trial, no difference in the reduction in cardiovascular and kidney outcomes was observed with empagliflozin in adults aged 65 years and older and younger than 65 years.15 In DECLARE-TIMI,16 a cardiovascular outcomes trial for dapagliflozin, post-hoc analyses showed a reduced risk of the composite of cardiovascular death or hospitalisation for heart failure versus placebo consistently across different age subgroups (<65 years, ≥65 years to <75 years, and ≥75 years) in adults with type 2 diabetes. Additionally, in an analysis of the DAPA-HF trial,17 dapagliflozin reduced the risk of death and worsening heart failure and improved symptoms across the broad spectrum of age subgroups. Furthermore, a meta-analysis of six trials that pooled data from 35 546 adults enrolled in trials of SGLT2 inhibitors showed a reduction in cardiovascular death or hospitalisation for heart failure in adults with type 2 diabetes, irrespective of age.18 Taken together with the results presented in the present analyses, these findings support the cardiorenal benefits of ertugliflozin in older adults.
The mean baseline eGFR was lower in older participants compared with younger participants. As is commonly observed with SGLT2 inhibitor initiation, including in the VERTIS CV trial,12 the initial decrease in eGFR observed with ertugliflozin compared with placebo, followed by stabilisation over the course of the study, was reported across all age subgroups with no differences observed. The decline in the urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio with ertugliflozin versus placebo reported in the overall population12 was observed in our analyses across age subgroups. The attenuation of eGFR decline and reduction in the urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio observed across age subgroups have also been reported with other SGLT2 inhibitors.7,  8,  14,  19
Ertugliflozin was generally well tolerated in participants in all age subgroups. The incidence of adverse events, serious adverse events, discontinuations of investigational product because of adverse events, and deaths did not differ across treatment groups in the age subgroups evaluated. However, independent of randomised treatment assignment, adverse events were higher for adults aged 65 years and older and 75 years and older compared with younger subgroups. The incidence of genital mycotic infection was higher for those treated with ertugliflozin compared with those treated with placebo in all age subgroups. The higher incidence of genital mycotic infection in women across treatment groups and age subgroups is consistent with previous studies of other SGLT2 inhibitors,20,  21,  22 including a pooled analysis of data from up to seven phase 3 studies of ertugliflozin in patients aged 65 years and older with type 2 diabetes.23 In the current analyses, a nominally higher incidence of urinary tract infections was observed in the older subgroups (≥65 years and ≥75 years) compared with the younger subgroups and with ertugliflozin compared with placebo; however, the incidence of serious urinary tract infections did not differ between the ertugliflozin group and placebo group for any age subgroup. A higher incidence of urinary tract infections in older patients compared with younger patients has been reported in other studies of patients with type 2 diabetes.10,  24 Around a third of participants had at least one episode of hypoglycaemia. Given the risk of hypoglycaemia with the use of insulin and sulfonylureas, guidelines from the American Diabetes Association advocate for use of non-hypoglycaemic medications in older adults.25 In the overall VERTIS CV population, 3900 (47·3%) of 8246 participants were on insulin and 3390 (41·1%) were on sulfonylureas at baseline.9 Treatment with ertugliflozin was associated with a lower risk of hypoglycaemia, including first and recurrent hypoglycaemic events, compared with placebo.26
The incidence of kidney-related adverse events did not differ with ertugliflozin treatment compared with placebo treatment within each age subgroup. The incidence of hypovolaemia adverse events did not differ across the age subgroups and treatments, with very low numbers in the 75 years and older age subgroup limiting interpretation of the results. Most hypovolaemia events were mild, and transient across all age groups and treatments during the course of the study. Concomitant use of diuretics was more frequent in older subgroups compared with younger subgroups but did not appear to contribute to a higher incidence of volume-related adverse events in participants randomly assigned to ertugliflozin.
Bone safety is an area of interest with respect to SGLT2 inhibitors, with assessment of fracture risk providing evidence for bone safety. Bone safety is particularly relevant to older adults, as the risk of fractures and associated consequences increases with age and with type 2 diabetes.27,  28 In the analyses reported here, falls and fractures were more common in the older age subgroups, but did not differ across treatment groups. In the overall VERTIS CV population, there was no significant difference in the incidence of fractures between ertugliflozin and placebo.9 The proportion of adults who underwent amputation was low and consistent with the overall VERTIS CV population,9 without any obvious effect of age.
There are several limitations that should be considered when interpreting the results of these subgroup analyses. The analyses were exploratory in nature and were not powered to detect small differences between subgroups, particularly comparisons involving the 75 years and older subgroup, which accounted for only 11% of the overall population. Moreover, the population was primarily White and not Hispanic or Latino. Therefore, the findings should not be extrapolated to minoritised populations. Another potential limitation is that frailty status, which is a risk factor for adverse outcomes in older adults with type 2 diabetes with and without atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease,10,  29 was not evaluated. Other potential limitations include possible measurement or selection biases in intention-to-treat estimates and built-in selection bias in using HRs.30 Furthermore, the trial duration was relatively short in the context of lifelong diseases.
The risk of developing cardiovascular disease and kidney disease increases with age. Around half the population recruited in the VERTIS CV trial were aged 65 years and older, with a substantial proportion aged 75 years and older, all with established atherosclerotic disease and a high prevalence of heart failure and kidney disease. The results from these subgroup analyses of a large population of older adults show that safety concerns should not be a barrier to the use of SGLT2 inhibitors in older adults with type 2 diabetes. These findings have the potential to help clinical decision making by providing a longer-term evaluation of the cardiorenal safety and overall tolerability of ertugliflozin in this population, which is steadily increasing in size.
In conclusion, in VERTIS CV, cardiorenal outcomes did not differ in adults aged 65 years and older and younger than 65 years, and adults aged 75 years and older and younger than 75 years. Ertugliflozin preserved kidney function and was generally well tolerated in adults aged 65 years and older and 75 years and older, with no new safety concerns identified in older adults.