Introduction
Hearing loss has long been recognized as a factor in the development of Alzheimer dementia. Hearing loss and cognitive impairment are common as people age. The Lancet Commission’s 2020 report1 identified hearing impairment as the potentially modifiable risk factor with the largest contribution to dementia risk. Most studies that were cited to support this conclusion were observational studies of pure tone audibility. Based on these data, the report endorsed hearing aids that may be protective by avoiding social isolation and enhancing cognitive stimulation.

Audibility is necessary, but not sufficient, to comprehend and process auditory stimuli. Diminished pure tone audibility is commonly found with advancing age, as are difficulties with other aspects of signal detection and processing. Many older adults complain of difficulty processing speech in noisy settings, even when there is no clinically significant hearing loss. Extraction of auditory signals from competing signals depends on signal audibility and central auditory processes, including attention, working memory, and executive functioning.2

Carefully designed hearing assessment protocols can include assessments of pure tone audibility as well as understanding speech using monaural and dichotic tests of central auditory processing. Such a protocol can enable us to determine the risk level associated with specific types of hearing demands. Central auditory processing can be assessed using dichotic tests, in which competing speech signals are presented to both ears at levels louder than an individual’s pure tone detection threshold. Monaural presentations of speech stimuli are presented only to 1 ear, without competing sounds.

We previously showed that people with poor functioning on dichotic tests had a higher risk of developing Alzheimer dementia than people with normal functioning.3 In this earlier article, we had limited follow-up data and could not comment on intermediate levels of functioning on dichotic tests. In this article, we present further follow-up data, including more than 1500 additional person-years of follow-up and more than 50 additional incident cases of Alzheimer dementia. With these data, we were able to observe the contribution of signal audibility and monaural and dichotic speech recognition in association with dementia and Alzheimer dementia risk.

Methods
Participants were enrolled from the Adult Changes in Thought (ACT) prospective cohort study. The methods for ACT have been previously published.4,5 ACT invited a random sample of people 65 years or older who were members of what is now Kaiser Permanente Washington to receive a baseline evaluation at which cognition was assessed with the Cognitive Abilities Screening Instrument,6 a 100-point assessment, with higher scores indicating better functioning. People with scores of 86 or greater were assumed to not have dementia and were evaluated every 2 years with the same procedures. People with scores lower than 86 received a secondary evaluation. The secondary evaluation included a standardized clinical neurological evaluation, extensive battery of neuropsychological assessments, and medical records review. All data were reviewed at a consensus conference, where standardized criteria were used to identify dementia cases using Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Fourth Edition) (DSM-IV) criteria7 and probable or possible Alzheimer dementia using the criteria from McKhann et al.8 People not found to have dementia at consensus conference were evaluated every 2 years. The same methods for dementia and Alzheimer dementia detection have been consistently applied since 1994. The study at the time of hearing assessment did not make diagnoses of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or subjective cognitive impairment. We assigned the midway point between the ACT study visit that produced the dementia diagnosis and the preceding visit as the dementia onset date.

This investigation focused on a subset of 313 ACT participants who underwent additional hearing testing. Oral and written informed consent was obtained for all study participants, and all study procedures were approved by institutional review boards of the University of Washington and Group Health (now Kaiser Permanente Washington). We excluded 18 people with prevalent dementia and 15 people who dropped out with no further follow-up, leaving an analytic sample of 280 participants. Additional cognitive tests were administered, including several that required intact vision, such as Trailmaking tests A and B, clock copy, and the Stroop test. None of the participants were noted by our trained staff to have vision disturbance that affected the validity of these tests.

Pure tone audiometry was used to determine each individual’s hearing thresholds.3 Pure tone averages (PTAs) were obtained from 3 frequencies (0.5, 1.0, and 2.0 kHz) for each ear and categorized according to the degree of hearing loss: no hearing loss (PTA, ≤25 dB), mild hearing loss (PTA, 26-40 dB), or moderate hearing loss (PTA, 41-48 dB). No participant had a PTA of greater than 48 dB in either ear, as this was an exclusion criterion for the initial study. All participants had either no hearing loss or mild hearing loss in the better ear.

Monaural word recognition testing in a quiet environment was also conducted.3 All participants met inclusion criteria of having word recognition scores (WRSs) of 72% correct or better. We categorized the WRS as excellent (90%-100%), good or slight difficulty (78%-88%), and fair to moderate difficulty (72%-76%). There were no substantial central auditory pathologies according to brainstem, middle latency, and cortical auditory evoked potential results.9

Central auditory processing was assessed using Dichotic Sentence Identification (DSI) and Dichotic Digits tests (DDT).3 The DSI presents different sentences simultaneously to both ears, while the DDT presents different digits simultaneously to both ears. Stimuli were presented at suprathreshold levels (50 dB more than the worse ear PTA) for the DSI. For the DDT, participants were asked to repeat the digits they heard. For the DSI, participants selected sentences they heard from a printed list. Performance on the DSI and DDT was categorized as poor (<50), intermediate (50-79), and intact (≥80).

We analyzed incident cases of all-cause dementia and probable or possible Alzheimer disease dementia using data from the most recent ACT data freeze in September 2018. We used Cox proportional hazards models for DSM-IV dementia and probable or possible Alzheimer dementia based on the criteria from McKhann et al.8 We used age as the time axis; people contributed to time beginning at their age at their hearing test. We controlled all models for education. We used Schoenfeld residuals to test the assumption of proportional hazards, which we found to be appropriate in each case. Analyses were conducted using Stata, version 16 (StataCorp).

We controlled the DSI and DDT models for PTA in the worse ear; results were essentially identical when controlling for PTA in the better ear. For comparison, we also performed analyses of the risk associated with PTA categories in the worse ear and the better ear with and without including the DSI or DDT measures of central processing.

Results
The study cohort included 280 people with DSI data and 279 with DDT data. A total of 177 participants (63%) were women, and the mean age (SD) was 79.5 (5.2) years. Nearly half the sample had at least 16 years of education, and 1 (<1%) reported being American Indian/Alaska Native, 12 (4%) Asian, 13 (5%) Black, and 250 (89%) White. Demographic characteristics and hearing test results as stratified by DSI and DDT categories are shown in Table 1 and Table 2.

People with poor (<50) and intermediate (50-79) DSI or DDT scores were older on average than people with intact (≥80) DSI or DDT scores. The distributions of educational attainment also differed across groups. There were no statistically significant differences across groups regarding sex, proportion of people with 1 or more APOE ε4 alleles, or self-reported race, although there was a trend toward fewer people with poor DTI performance with 1 or more APOE ε4 alleles (Table 1).

There were differences in the distribution of PTAs across groups, with more people with poor DSI having poorer than normal audibility as measured by PTA, whether in the worse or better ear. The same pattern was found with the DDT, though it was not statistically different across DDT performance categories for PTA in the worse ear (Table 2). Monaural WRSs were also associated with DSI and DDT categories, although differences were more apparent and statistically significant with categories defined by the DDT than those defined with the DSI (Table 1 and Table 2).

Over 2196 years of follow-up, there were 89 incident cases of dementia, of which 84 (94.4%) were Alzheimer dementia. Our earlier article3 included 23 cases of incident dementia (21 [91.3%] Alzheimer dementia); the remaining 66 cases (63 [95.5%] Alzheimer dementia) are newly reported in this article.

Adjusted hazard ratios (HRs) for dementia and probable or possible Alzheimer dementia are shown in Table 3. There were no strong associations between PTA in the worse ear or WRS and either all-cause dementia risk (PTA in the worse ear: 26-40 vs ≤25 dB: HR, 1.20; 95% CI, 0.76-1.91; 41-70 vs ≤25 dB: HR, 1.29; 95% CI, 0.67-2.52; WRS: 78%-88% vs 90%-100%: HR, 0.97; 95% CI, 0.61-1.54; 72%-76% vs 90%-100%: HR, 1.15; 95% CI, 0.28-4.85) or Alzheimer dementia risk (PTA in the worse ear: 26-40 vs ≤25 dB: HR, 1.19; 95% CI, 0.74-1.92; 41-70 vs ≤25 dB: HR, 1.23; 95% CI, 0.62-2.45; WRS: 78%-88% vs 90%-100%: HR, 0.90; 95% CI, 0.57-1.42; 72%-76% vs 90%-100%: HR, 1.07; 95% CI, −0.26 to 4.45). There was a statistically significant association between PTA in the better ear and both dementia outcomes (dementia: HR, 1.67; 95% CI, 1.09-2.57; Alzheimer dementia: HR, 1.62; 95% CI, 1.03-2.50). There was increased risk associated with mild and moderate levels of impairment on the DSI and DDT with both dementia outcomes, controlling for PTA.

The modest and nonsignificant associations between PTA in the worse ear and dementia and Alzheimer dementia disappeared when we included a term for DDT performance in the model (Table 4). Similarly, the associations of mildly impaired better ear PTA with both dementia outcomes were attenuated and no longer statistically significant when we included terms for DDT performance.

Discussion
In this prospective cohort study of older adults, we found that people who performed at intermediate and poor levels on dichotic tests were at substantially increased risk of developing incident all-cause dementia and Alzheimer dementia. People with PTA deficits had an increased risk for dementia and Alzheimer dementia, but this was either attenuated and no longer statistically significant (better ear PTA) or completely null (worse ear PTA) when we included measures of dichotic tests, suggesting that apparent associations between PTA and increased risk may be because of confounding of that association by central auditory processing.

We conducted monaural word recognition (WRS) and dichotic DDT and DSI tests at suprathreshold levels; thus, the stimuli should have been loud enough for participants to hear. The findings suggest that increased dementia risk may be specifically associated with impairments seen in dichotic tests of central auditory processing. Point estimates for PTA in the worse ear (approximately 1.30 for poor vs intact PTA) from these data are similar to estimates from larger studies that formed the basis of the Lancet Commission’s discussion of hearing loss10 and are consistent with recent large studies of associations between incident hearing loss and dementia risk in which dementia was defined using claims data.11-13 In this study, the association of moderate hearing loss as defined by PTA in the worse ear and dementia risk was not apparent in a model that included DDT.

The pattern of findings was similar for PTA in the better ear. There was a statistically significant association of mild impairment as defined by PTA in the better ear and both dementia outcomes. This association was substantially attenuated and was not statistically different from the null when we included measures of central auditory functioning.

These findings suggest the hypothesis that associations reported between PTA and dementia risk may be because of impaired central auditory processing that involves dichotic stimuli. The possibility that the association between PTA and dementia risk may be because of confounding by impaired central auditory processing has been suggested before.14 Panza et al15 specifically recommended collecting measures of audibility together with measures of central auditory processing to tease apart these possibly distinct and mutually reinforcing risk factors, which is similar to our approach in this article.

In these analyses, we added substantial follow-up time (2200 person-years vs 690 person-years) and approximately quadrupled the number of cases we had available from our prior article.3 These new data enable us to draw finer distinctions among the components that contribute to auditory dysfunction.

In particular, we found higher risk for dementia and Alzheimer dementia for moderate and mild impairment as measured by the DSI and DDT. These findings were from models that controlled for worse ear PTA, demonstrating independent associations of moderate and mild central auditory processing impairments with dementia and Alzheimer dementia risk.

The results reinforce reports of smaller studies associating dichotic auditory processing with increased risks of Alzheimer dementia. Häggström et al16 measured DDT in 136 older adults at baseline; the mean age was 62 years and the age ranged from 50 to 75 years. Because of attrition, follow-up data were only available for 47 people. Of those, 3 (6.4%) had Alzheimer dementia at baseline, and 21 (44.7%) had MCI. There were only 5 incident cases of Alzheimer dementia during follow-up, so there was limited power to address whether poor or intermediate scores on the DDT were associated with increased risk. A subsequent article by that group17 evaluated 57 people with MCI at baseline. They found an association between DDT scores at baseline and risk for all-cause dementia but not for Alzheimer dementia. Dementia and Alzheimer dementia outcomes for these 2 studies were derived from usual care, as opposed to the prospective identification of research-quality dementia and Alzheimer dementia approaches reported in this article.

A recent cross-sectional study in Italy found strong associations between impaired measures of central auditory processing (<50% on DSI) and MCI and dementia18; however, directionality could not be assessed. A Canadian study evaluated cross-sectional associations between central auditory processing and fluid and imaging biomarkers in a cognitively intact group of people with a family history of Alzheimer disease. They found associations between central auditory processing and cerebrospinal fluid tau and brain structural findings that were consistent with early stages of Alzheimer disease.19 Collectively, these studies, together with results of our study, support the hypothesis that changes in central functioning may accompany or precede development of Alzheimer dementia.

Several possible mechanisms have been postulated to explain the association between age-related hearing problems and dementia and Alzheimer risk.20,21 Several of these may work synergistically. Hearing problems are associated with social isolation, loneliness,22 and depression,23 although there are data that suggest that associations between sensory deficits and cognition are not strongly mediated by these social factors.24 Other possible mechanisms include hearing loss leading to alterations in cortical processing, with increased assignment of cognitive resources to auditory processing at the expense of other processes.20 Others hypothesize that age and/or reduced perceived auditory stimuli may lead to changes in brain structure.25 Common causes, such as vascular disease, may underlie age-related hearing problems and dementia risk.20 Another possibility is that Alzheimer-type pathological processes precede and contribute to central auditory processing impairments, leading measures of those impairments to be strong noncausal markers for dementia.

Analyses of the DDT and DSI results suggested an increased risk for dementia and Alzheimer dementia that was associated with moderate and severe levels of impairment. Results for the DSI suggested a graded association with a lower level of risk that was associated with moderate impairment and a higher level of risk for those with more severe impairment, whereas results for the DDT suggested similar levels of risk for moderate and severe levels of impairment (Table 3). It is not clear why the DSI showed a graded association while the DDT did not. Recent parametric studies have shown differences in performance depending on the method of recall.26 Another possibility is that the DDT may be less cognitively demanding than the DSI because the digits come from a closed set of single syllable words and hearing the vowel portion on its own can aid perception. In contrast, the DSI materials are longer and demand greater processing abilities because of their linguistic complexity. The ACT cohort was well educated on average. The proportion of people with fewer than 12 years of education was similar for those with poor DDT or DSI performance (13% vs 10%, Table 1 and Table 2). Differences in literacy levels are not likely associated with these results.

Limitations
This study has several limitations. This was an observational study, and our findings could reflect residual or unmeasured confounding. Such associations would have to be substantial to explain away the strong and consistent signals we found. Also, the cohort studied has somewhat limited racial and ethnic and educational heterogeneity, although we do not know of reasons these hearing tests would work differently or have other implications in other racial and ethnic groups. The sample was too small to permit detailed analyses of health covariates, but we do not know why hearing tests would work differently or have other implications for people with different health. Despite attempting to minimize the contribution of hearing loss to performance on speech tests, including the WRS, DDT, and DSI, by presenting stimuli at suprathreshold levels, we cannot rule out potential residual effects that are associated with audibility. We had data for only 3 PTA frequencies. All 3 tones assessed lower frequency hearing loss (<4 kHz), which has more often been implicated in associations with cognition and dementia.10 Monaural word recognition in noise was not tested, so we do not know how it would perform. We did not have data on hearing aid use, although the proportions with moderate hearing loss according to the worse ear PTA were available and were analyzed in this article; no participant had as much as moderate hearing loss when categorized according to the better ear PTA.

Conclusions
We found that intermediate and especially poor performance on dichotic tests of central auditory processing were associated with substantially higher risk of dementia and Alzheimer dementia. Other tests of hearing function (PTA, monaural speech tests) did not show significant associations with dementia and Alzheimer dementia risk. These results suggest caution in extrapolating from studies that rely solely on PTA to assess hearing difficulties and in projecting possible associations of hearing aids with reducing dementia risk, such as the ACHIEVE study.27 These results reinforce previous calls to use multiple measures of hearing difficulty in research studies of dementia risk. Dichotic tests of central auditory processing may offer a relatively inexpensive, well-tolerated means of identifying older adults who are at heightened risk of developing Alzheimer dementia.15 Finally, given that hearing loss had the highest population attributable fraction of potentially modifiable risk according to the recent Lancet 2020 report,1 and that the frequency of hearing loss in aging populations is quite high, more research is needed, perhaps including pragmatic clinical trials of hearing aids in older adults.