Introduction

Extreme dilatative outward remodeling of the large intracranial arteries has been associated 
with cognitive decline and dementia.1 Autopsies suggest that brain arterial aging is 
associated with concentric wall thickening, luminal dilation, and outward remodeling, which 
occurs even in the absence of atherosclerosis.2 This outward remodeling is theorized to 
lower the impedance of the cerebral vasculature, reducing arterial pulse wave reflections 
and facilitating the transmission of damaging pulsatile energy to the capillary bed.3 
Excessive arterial pulsatility has a demonstrated association with microvascular dysfunction 
in the systemic circulation.4 In the cerebral circulation, excessive pulsatility may lead to 
parenchymal damage and cognitive impairment.3

White matter hyperintensities (WMH) are radiographic features indicative of cerebral small 
vessel disease, and have a reported prevalence of 94% in older adults.5 The associated 
pathology of WMH is diverse, and includes ischemia, hypoperfusion, inflammation.6 Post-
mortem examinations of WMH reveal arteriolar changes, fibrohyalinosis, and capillary 
rarefaction, which are accompanied by axonal demyelination, gliosis, and white matter 
degeneration.6 In previous investigations, central artery stiffness, as assessed by the carotid-
femoral pulse wave velocity (cf-PWV), has been associated with WMH and cognitive 
decline.7,8 Pulsatile energy transmits efficiently in the setting of central artery stiffness, 
with minimal absorption by the normally compliant aortic walls.9 Without a buffering 
impedance mismatch at the interface with distal arteries, excessive aortic pulsatile energy 
could propagate to the distal cerebrovascular microcirculation,10 which may explain the 
association between dilative remodeling of the cerebral arteries and cognitive outcomes.2 
However, the relationship between central arterial stiffness, brain arterial dilation, and 
WMH has not been previously investigated in a population-based study. We hypothesized 
that in the general population of older adults, brain arterial dilation would associate with 
microvascular damage as assessed by WMH volume, and that the relationship would be 
modified by central artery stiffness.


Methods

The ARIC Study

The Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study’s data are owned by the National 
Heart Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI). The data are publicly available to qualified 
investigators with an approved manuscript proposal and data use agreement. Upon 
reasonable request, the ARIC coordinating center may make the data, analytic methods, 
and study materials available to other researchers for purposes of reproducing the results or 
replicating the procedure.

The ARIC study is an observational, population-based cohort of 15,792 mostly white or 
black adults in 4 US communities: Forsyth County, NC; Washington County, MD; Jackson, 
MS; and Minneapolis, MN. Study participants were recruited with informed consent and 
have been prospectively followed since enrollment (1987–1989). To date, participation in the 
ARIC cohort study has involved 7 completed in-person study visits, with ongoing annual 
telephone assessments and surveillance of hospitalized events. For the purposes of our study, 
all imaging, clinical, neurocognitive, and laboratory data were collected from the ARIC 
Neurocognitive Study (ARIC-NCS) in 2011–2013. All research activities are approved by 
local institutional review boards from the 4 ARIC communities.

Carotid-Femoral Pulse Wave Velocity

Carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity (cf-PWV) was measured with an Omron VP-1000plus 
device (Omron Corporation; Kyoto, Japan), following a standardized protocol.11 Pressure 
waveforms at the carotid and femoral pulses were captured by applanation tonometry 
with simultaneous electrocardiography. The time delay from the R-wave until the pressure 
wave was quantified, and the carotid-femoral transit time was derived by subtracting the 
carotid from the femoral time delay. The carotid-femoral transit distance was estimated by 
measuring the linear distance from the carotid to femoral pulse, minus the linear distance 
from the suprasternal notch to the carotid pulse. The cf-PWV was calculated by dividing 
the transit distance by the transit time. In the published literature, mean cf-PWV among 
individuals =70 years with normal blood pressure who lack cardiovascular risk factors and 
take no medications for hypertension, diabetes, or hyperlipidemia is reported to be 10.9 
m/s (95% CI: 5.5 – 16.3 m/s).12 Consistent with recommended age-specific cutpoints, we 
considered a cf-PWV >12 m/s to be elevated.13 We considered a cf-PWV =40 m/s to be 
physiologically implausible and likely to represent technical error, resulting in the omission 
of 2 study participants from our analysis.

Brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging

Brain imaging was performed on 3.0 T scanners by certified MRI technologists following a 
standardized imaging protocol. As previously described, 3-D time of flight (TOF) magnetic 
resonance angiography (MRA) and 3-D high-isotropic resolution vessel wall imaging 
were acquired with imaging resolutions of 0.50 × 0.50 × 0.55 mm3 and reviewed for 
image quality.14 Intracranial plaque was qualitatively assessed by eccentric wall thickening 
on vessel wall imaging, with or without luminal stenosis on coregistered TOF MRA.14 
Arterial lumen diameters of the anterior cerebral artery and middle cerebral artery were 

measured bilaterally from MRA with centerline segmentation, using non-uniform rational 
b-splines (NURBS) surface modeling software (LAVA, Leiden University Medical Center, 
the Netherlands) developed for the ARIC Study MRI analysis.15 For the purposes of this 
analysis, the M1A1 segment diameter was defined by the larger of either the A1 segment 
of the anterior cerebral artery or the M1 segment of the middle cerebral artery. The 
cerebral white matter was imaged by T2 fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), and 
segmented by an atlas-based technique using 3-D magnetization-prepared rapid acquisition 
gradient echo (MPRAGE), with volumes derived by a semi-automated algorithm.16 The total 
intracranial volume (ICV) was quantified on MPRAGE using FreeSurfer (Martinos Center 
for Biomedical Imaging; Boston, MA).17 Images were segmented and parcellated using an 
atlas-based technique, and volumes were derived with a semi-automated algorithm.

Clinical Covariates

Clinical and laboratory data were collected by centrally trained personnel following 
standardized protocols. Three seated blood pressure measurements were obtained after a 
5-minute rest using an oscillometric automated sphygmomanometer (Omron HEM-907 XL, 
Omron, Kyoto, Japan), retaining and averaging the last 2 measurements. Hypertension 
was considered a systolic blood pressure =140 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure =90 
mmHg, or antihypertensive medication use. Antihypertensive medications were grouped 
into a single category and included angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin 
receptor blockers, anti-adrenergics, vasodilators, calcium channel blockers, beta blockers, 
and diuretics. Blood glucose, lipoprotein profiles, and serum creatinine were processed by 
a central laboratory. Diabetes mellitus was defined by a fasting blood glucose =126 mg/dL, 
a non-fasting blood glucose =200 mg/dL, or prior physician diagnosis. Hyperlipidemia 
was considered a total cholesterol =240 mg/dL or statin use within 4 weeks of the 
clinic visit. Chronic kidney disease was defined by an estimated glomerular filtration 
rate <45 mL/min/1.73 m2. Mild cognitive impairment and dementia were classified by a 
standardized, algorithmic approach, and adjudicated by an expert panel of physicians and 
neuropsychologists.18 Left ventricular stroke volume was obtained by echocardiography, 
by subtracting the end-systolic left ventricular volume from the end-diastolic volume. 
History of myocardial infarction, heart failure and stroke were classified by standardized 
criteria.19–21 For the purposes of this analysis, participants with history of stroke were 
excluded to avoid conflating WMH due to large vessel obstruction with WMH representative 
of other etiologies, such as arteriolar dysfunction. Age, sex, race, and smoking habits were 
self-reported.

Statistical Analysis

All statistical analyses were performed using SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute; Cary, NC). For 
descriptive purposes, study participants were stratified by a cf-PWV =12 m/s or >12 
m/s, and by an M1A1 diameter = or > the sex-specific median. Separate M1A1 median 
diameters were calculated for women and men, to account for the known relationship 
between arterial diameters and body size. Continuous variables were assessed for normality 
and compared between groups using 2-sample t-tests or Wilcoxon rank sums tests, as 
appropriate. Categorical variables were compared using .2 tests. Categorical variables with 
expected cell counts <5 were analyzed using Fisher’s exact test. The association between 

M1A1 diameter (per 0.5 mm increment) and the log of WMH volume was analyzed by 
multivariable linear regression. WMH volume was log-transformed due to its highly skewed 
distribution. The model was first adjusted for ICV (as a measure of anthropometry), and 
demographics (age, race, and sex), followed by a second model with additional adjustment 
for factors associated with arteriolar dysfunction and WMH (diabetes mellitus, systolic 
blood pressure, and antihypertensive medication use within 4 weeks). Modification by 
elevated central artery stiffness was analyzed by stratifying the models by cf-PWV >12 
m/s vs. =12 m/s, and by testing the multiplicative interaction of elevated cf-PWV with 
M1A1 diameter. A P value <0.10 was considered suggestive of statistical interaction, to 
account for the diminished power inherent with stratification.22 Several sensitivity analyses 
were conducted. In the first sensitivity analysis, the model was additionally adjusted for 
factors associated with an M1A1 diameter above the sex-specific median value. In a 
second sensitivity analysis, potential modification by cognitive status (normal cognition 
vs. mild cognitive impairment / dementia) was analyzed, with significance tested by the 
multiplicative interaction of cognitive status with M1A1 diameter.

Results

A total of 1765 participants underwent brain MRI at ARIC visit 5 (2011–2013), with 
images and cf-PWV data deemed to be technically adequate. Out of these study participants, 
1589 (91%) had complete measurements for the M1A1 segment diameter and ICV. Of 
the participants with complete MRI data, 1394 (88%) were evaluated by cf-PWV testing. 
After the exclusion of 80 participants with identified M1A1 segment plaque (6%), a total 
of 1314 remained. Omitting 39 participants with a history of stroke (3%) yielded a final 
analytic sample of 1275 individuals, which constituted our study population. The mean 
participant age at the time of testing was 77 years; 59% were women and 30% were Black. 
A third (33%) were classified with mild cognitive impairment and 3% were classified with 
dementia. The median M1A1 diameter was 2.69 mm for women, and 2.89 mm for men. A 
total of 32 participants (3%) had the largest M1A1 diameter measured from an A1 segment. 
The overall mean cf-PWV value was 11.7 m/s.

Study participants with an M1A1 diameter above the sex-specific median were slightly 
older than those with =median diameter (76 vs. 75 years), but medical histories were 
largely comparable. However, participants with an above-median M1A1 diameter had 
slightly higher left ventricular stroke volume (54 vs. 52 mL) and prevalence of atrial 
fibrillation (6% vs. 4%). Despite specifying separate M1A1 median diameters for women 
and men, participants with an above-median M1A1 diameter also had larger ICV (1410 vs. 
1357 cm3), suggesting a persistent relationship with body habitus after sex stratification. 
Participants with an above-median M1A1 diameter also had a greater median volume of 
WMH (13.0 vs. 9.9 cm3). The mean cf-PWV was 11.7 m/s, both for participants with a = 
and >median M1A1 diameter, Table 1. A total of 516 (40%) participants had elevated central 
artery stiffness, as indicated by a cf-PWV >12 m/s. Participants with elevated cf-PWV 
were older (77 vs. 75 years) and more often Black (35% vs. 27%) but did not differ in 
sex distributions from participants with cf-PWV =12 m/s. Cardiovascular comorbidities, 
particularly hypertension (84% vs. 66%) and diabetes mellitus (37% vs. 26%), were more 
prevalent with elevated cf-PWV. Although ICV was comparable, the extent of WMH 

differed between the groups, with a greater volume among participants with elevated cf-
PWV compared to those with cf-PWV =12 m/s (9.9 vs. 13.8 cm3), Table 1. Mean M1A1 
diameters were comparable, irrespective of central artery stiffness classification.

After minimal adjustment for ICV, age, race, and sex, a 0.5 mm increment in M1A1 
diameter was associated with a 14% greater WMH volume (exponentiated ß = 1.14; 95% 
CI: 1.07 – 1.22). The model results were not altered by additional adjustment for diabetes 
mellitus, antihypertensive medication use, or systolic blood pressure (exponentiated ß = 
1.14; 95% CI: 1.07 – 1.22), or by additional adjustment for left ventricular stroke volume 
or history or atrial fibrillation (exponentiated ß = 1.14; 95% CI: 1.07 – 1.22). However, 
the association between M1A1 diameter and WMH volume was amplified in the setting of 
elevated central artery stiffness, yielding a 24% greater WMH volume per 0.5 mm increment 
in M1A1 diameter (exponentiated ß = 1.24; 95% CI: 1.12– 1.36). By comparison, a 0.5 
mm increment in M1A1 diameter was associated with a 10% greater WMH volume in 
participants with a cf-PWV <12 m/s (exponentiated ß = 1.10; 95% CI: 1.01 – 1.19); P 
for interaction = 0.04 (Figure 1). The association between M1A1 diameters and WMH 
volume was not dependent upon cognitive status. After adjustment for demographics and 
ICV, each 0.5 mm increment in M1A1 diameter was associated with a 12% greater WMH 
volume among those with normal cognition (exponentiated ß = 1.12; 95% CI: 1.03 – 1.22) 
and a 19% greater WMH volume among participants with mild cognitive impairment or 
dementia (exponentiated ß = 1.19; 95% CI: 1.08 – 1.22); P for interaction = 0.6. Additional 
adjustments for diabetes mellitus, systolic blood pressure, and antihypertensive medication 
use within 4 weeks yielded similar model results.

Discussion

In this population-based examination of older adults participating in the ARIC study, we 
observed that larger brain arterial diameters were associated with greater extent of cerebral 
microvascular damage, as assessed by WMH volume in participants free of intracranial 
atherosclerosis and history of stroke. The association between brain arterial diameters and 
WMH volume was independent of anthropometry and appeared to be modified by elevated 
central artery stiffness.

Non-atherosclerotic outward remodeling of the cerebral vasculature is likely to lower 
cerebrovascular impedance, with the potential to permit excessive and damaging aortic 
pulsatile energy into the cerebral microcirculation. Exposure of the microvasculature to 
high pulsatile pressure has been shown to result in blunted reactivity, possibly due to 
endothelial dysfunction, rarefaction, and structural damage of the microcirculation.4 An 
impedance mismatch normally occurs as pressure waves propagate distally from the elastic, 
low impedance aorta to the relatively higher resistance branching arteries, resulting in a 
partial reflection of the waves back towards the heart.23 This wave reflection protects 
the microcirculation from excessive pulsatile energy,3 but the buffering effect is reduced 
by vasodilation of the proximal arteries.24 Autopsy series suggest that vascular aging is 
associated with concentric wall thickening and outward arterial remodeling even in the in the 
absence of atherosclerosis,2,23 which may lower the impedance of the cerebral circulation.

Our analysis shows a relationship between larger arterial diameters and WMH volume, 
which is amplified in the setting of elevated central artery stiffness. Numerous previous 
studies have reported positive correlations between central artery stiffness and WMH 
volume.3,8,25 Pulsatility of the middle cerebral artery, as assessed by transcranial Doppler 
ultrasound, also correlates strongly with central artery stiffness,26 and a greater degree 
of middle cerebral artery pulsatility is associated with more extensive WMH volume.27 
Outward remodeling of the large cerebrovascular arteries may facilitate transmission 
of aortic pulsatile energy to the cerebral microcirculation, by lowering cerebrovascular 
impedance. While there is evidence to suggest that larger diameters of the extracranial 
carotid artery are associated with greater extent of WMH,28,29 a similar association was 
not observed with normalized anterior and middle cerebral artery diameters in the Northern 
Manhattan Stoke Study (NOMAS).30 Whether brain arterial diameters in the NOMAS study 
were quantified in segments free of atherosclerotic lesions is unspecified, however.30 In the 
present study, M1A1 segment diameters with artery-specific plaque were excluded from the 
analysis, because diameters were measured across the lumen and presence of atherosclerotic 
plaque would confound the assessment of outward arterial remodeling.

The deep white matter lacks extensive vascular collateralization and is particularly 
vulnerable to hypoperfusion. In experimental studies, WMH has been generated by inducing 
cerebral ischemia, 31,32 and in human autopsy series, a 20% decreased concentration of 
arterioles and afferent capillaries has been reported in WMH, compared to healthy white 
matter.33 Post-mortem histopathologic examinations of brain regions with WMH reveal 
arteriolosclerosis characterized by angiofibrosis, hyalinosis, and reduced elasticity.6 When 
extensive, the luminal narrowing of hyaline arteriosclerosis may induce microvascular 
hypoperfusion, endothelial cell apoptosis, and capillary rarefaction, leading to tissue 
hypoperfusion, axonal injury and demyelination.34 Once thought to be an adaptive response 
to chronic elevation in mean blood pressure, inward hypertrophic arteriolar remodeling 
is also sensitive to widening pulse pressure in the absence of change in mean blood 
pressure.10 Elevated central artery stiffness is accompanied by widening pulse pressure, 
and may plausibly promote microvascular damage in the cerebral circulation, particularly 
in the setting of lowered cerebrovascular impedance due to non-atherosclerotic outward 
remodeling of the large arteries. Though often asymptomatic, WMH is predictive of 
cognitive impairment, dementia, and stroke.35–38

Our study has some weaknesses that merit discussion. This analysis is cross-sectional, and it 
is not known whether brain artery outward remodeling and elevated central artery pressure 
preceded development of WMH. Brain MRI from earlier cohort visits in 1993–1995 and 
2004–2006 lacks angiography for a historical assessment of arterial diameters, and while 
aortic compliance is available from echocardiography data acquired in 1993–1995, it is 
limited to Black study participants and differs from cf-PWV.39 We were unable to consider 
location of WMH (i.e., periventricular, deep or subcortical white matter), nor did we have 
quantification of cerebrovascular blood flow. The left and right A1 and M1 segments were 
summarized by the largest overall diameter, but only 3% of the study population had the 
largest diameter arising from an A1 segment. Although cerebrovascular events arising from 
the ACA are rare (0.6% - 3% of acute ischemic strokes),40 A1 segment dilatation relative to 
the ipsilateral M1 segment (A1/M1 ratio) has been associated with increased risk of ACA 

embolic stroke.41 However, our study population was limited to participants without history 
of stroke. Our study also has several noteworthy strengths. The ARIC study provides a large 
sample of older adults from the general population, allowing a unique assessment of brain 
MRI, which is otherwise limited to patient populations with clinical need for imaging. All 
clinical and laboratory data were acquired following standardized protocols with quality 
assurance. Brain MRI was interpreted by board-certified neuroradiologists and imaging 
features were measured by certified analysts.

In conclusion, in the examination of older individuals from the general population, we 
observed a greater magnitude of WMH volume in association with larger cerebrovascular 
artery diameters free of atherosclerosis. The association appears to be modified by elevated 
central artery stiffness, suggesting an actionable target for intervention. Strategies to reduce 
central artery stiffness may forestall the association between dilatative arterial remodeling 
and microvascular damage in the cerebral circulation.