INTRODUCTION
The prevalence of cirrhosis and end-stage liver disease (ESLD) has continued to increase in North America.1 Decompensated cirrhosis has a 5-year survival of only 34%–56%, with liver transplantation (LT) as the only life-saving option.1 Liver transplantation recipients (LTRs) have complex care needs that require proficient self-management skills to maintain healthy behaviors and adhere to treatments. Long-term post-LT health is a critical evidence gap. Outcomes beyond survival such as cognitive function, physical performance status, quality of life, and self-management are understudied.2,3

LTRs must be able to navigate complex health systems, engage and integrate guidance from multiple clinicians, adhere to lifestyle changes and clinical monitoring, and take multiple medications with potential side effects and frequent dosing changes.4,5 Thus, they must be cognitively intact to access, use, and remember health information to make informed decisions (a.k.a. “health literacy”) and to develop strong self-management skills to optimize health.6–10 LTRs are at a risk for cognitive impairment due to ESLD prior to LT and lifelong immunosuppression. Though LT improves HE, some studies suggest that there may be incomplete resolution of cognitive impairment in those with recurrent pre-LT HE, particularly in cases of alcohol misuse (up to one-third of LTRs) and among individuals who are older and with diabetes.10–14 Cognitive impairments have been seen up to 10 years post-LT in some cases.15–17 A study of 50 LTRs found that 70% showed signs of new impairments 1-year post-LT in immediate memory, visuospatial ability, language, attention, or delayed recall.18 One potential contributor to such cognitive impairment in LTRs could be calcineurin inhibitors, found in post-LT immunosuppressants. These inhibitors could decrease brain ATP levels, lower mitochondrial energy metabolism, and impair brain activity.19

We conducted a systematic review of studies from 2004 to 2019 investigating post-LT cognitive function. Out of 34 studies with pre-LT to post-LT or control group comparisons, 8 were cross-sectional, and 26 were prospective. Results showed that up to 30% of LTRs scored lower on measures of fluid cognitive abilities, such as attention, working memory, processing speed, and visuospatial ability compared to controls.10,12,14–16,19–40. One study showed a 10% increase in the prevalence of impaired cognition, particularly visual-spatial/construction abilities, 1-year post-LT.27 Yet, these studies did not consider long-term cognitive outcomes and the impact of cognitive performance on chronic disease self-management, treatment adherence, functional health status, or health outcomes. This highlights the need for research that focuses on health and cognitive outcomes from pre-LT to post-LT, as well as patient management skills that could improve patient outcomes. Additional potentially modifiable behaviors, such as physical activity and sleep, may alter post-transplant health status trajectories, yet have not been thoroughly investigated.

In addition to LTRs, given the medical complexity of LT, caregivers or care partners are universally required by transplant programs.19,41 Few studies have assessed caregiver competencies thoroughly, and those that have suggest that care partners often receive little training.42,43 Furthermore, the associations between caregiver skills and LTR health outcomes are not well studied.

To better understand these knowledge gaps, the longitudinal LivCog cohort study (R01DK132138) that comprehensively evaluates post-LT cognitive trajectories evaluates physical function, quality of life, physical activity, sleep, and chronic disease outcomes.

LivCog conceptual framework
LivCog’s guiding conceptual model (Figure 1) was adapted for LT using the model from the Paasche-Orlow and Wolf (Co-I) model, which links patient cognitive and psychosocial factors to self-management, health literacy, and health outcomes.44 LT candidates and recipients have unique cognitive and self-management challenges. Prior to LT, there is a high prevalence of pretransplant HE, poor overall health status, high prevalence of alcohol use disorder, poor pre-LT self-care, and a rising prevalence of medical comorbidities that all may affect cognitive function.12,14,45,46 LT is associated with very high levels of medical complexity, multidrug regimens with multiple side effects, a need for frequent clinical monitoring (weekly to monthly), and sustained healthy behaviors to optimize long-term post-LT health.4,5,47 Pre-LT and post-LT sociodemographics, cognitive function, and health status may all affect post-LT outcomes. For this reason, LivCog will investigate potentially modifiable patient and care partner factors that mediate or moderate associations between cognitive function and transplant outcomes to guide future interventions. These factors include sleep, physical function/activity, and care partner support.

F1
FIGURE 1: Simplified Paasche-Orlow and Wolf Model linking cognitive function, health literacy and self-management to transplant outcomes. Abbreviation: LT, liver transplantation.
Study aims and hypotheses
Table 1 summarizes the aims and hypotheses of this study.

TABLE 1 - Aims and hypothesis
Aim 1	Assess cognitive trajectories from pretransplant to 2-y post-transplant and identify risk factors for poor cognitive function among a diverse sample of de novo LTRs
H1	Compared to age-matched comparators, LTRs will demonstrate poorer cognitive function across “fluid” domains of executive function, processing speed, and memory
H2	Premorbid and pretransplant cognitive function, older age, alcohol-associated liver disease, and metabolic/cardiovascular comorbidities will be associated with poorer cognition, trajectories of delayed or limited cognitive recovery, and presence of a persistent cognitive impairment
Aim 2	Evaluate associations between cognitive function and self-management skills, health behaviors, functional health status, and post-transplant outcomes among de novo LTRs
H3	Poorer cognition and impairment will be associated with weaker self-management skills, worse functional status, inadequate treatment adherence, and adverse post-transplant outcomes
Aim 3	Investigate potential mediators and moderators of associations between cognitive function and post-transplant outcomes among de novo LTRs.
H4	Physical inactivity, inadequate treatment adherence, poorer sleep quality, and impaired self-management skills will mediate associations between poor cognitive function and adverse health outcomes
H5	Greater care partner involvement and care partner health literacy will moderate associations
Abbreviations: H1, hypothesis; LTR, liver transplant recipients.

METHODS
Study design and aims
The LivCog study is a longitudinal observational study conducted at 3 transplant centers. The purpose of this study is to better characterize liver transplant recipients who are at a higher risk of cognitive impairment and compromised self-management capacity post-liver transplant. Specifically, the study aims to (1) assess cognitive trajectories from pre-liver transplant to 2 years post-liver transplant and identify risk factors for poor cognitive function among a diverse sample of de novo liver transplant recipients; (2) evaluate associations between cognitive function and self-management skills, health behaviors, functional health status, and post-liver transplant outcomes among “de novo” liver transplant recipients; and (3) investigate potential mediators and moderators of associations between cognitive function and post-liver transplant outcomes among “de novo” liver transplant recipients.

Setting
The LivCog study is being conducted at 3 transplant centers: the University of Pennsylvania, Northwestern University, and Baylor University. The Penn Transplant Clinic (UPenn) is the largest multiorgan transplant center in the Mid-Atlantic and ranks in the top 10 centers nationally with about 130 LTs annually. The Northwestern Medicine Kovler Organ Transplant Center (Northwestern) is one of the largest living donor LT programs in the United States, performing 100 LTs each year. Baylor University (Baylor) performs about 140 LTs a year at 2 locations: the Baylor University Medical Center at Dallas and the Baylor Scott & White All Saints Medical Center in Fort Worth.

Participants/subject eligibility
A total of 450 LTRs and their care partner dyads will be recruited at all sites over the course of a 33-month period. Patient eligibility criteria include (1) 18 years of age or older, (2) English and/or Spanish-speaking, (3) currently on the waitlist for an LT or an LTR, (4) seen as an outpatient in the LT clinic, and (5) able to provide signed, informed consent. Patients who do not speak English or Spanish have undergone a heart/liver or lung/liver transplantation and/or have received a prior transplant will be excluded from the study. Caregiver eligibility criteria include (1) 18 years of age or older, (2) speaking English and/or Spanish, (3) able to provide signed, informed consent, and (4) assisting transplant recipients with any of the following: transportation, medical appointments, medications, activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living.

Human subjects protection and clinical trial registration
The LivCog Study is using a single Institutional Review Board (IRB) to oversee the study at all sites. The University of Pennsylvania IRB is serving as the IRB of record and has approved all study procedures (850519). Informed consent for the pre-LT portion of the study can be done verbally and through electronic consent or written consent. Informed consent for the post-LT portion of the study can be done through electronic consent or written consent.

General design
The study will take place over 5 years with a 33-month enrollment period and 21 additional months of following subjects. This study consists of 3 groups of participants: patients pre-LT, patients post-LT, and post-LT care partners. Pre-LT cognitive assessments will be conducted on waitlisted patients. Additional cognitive assessments will be conducted on a rolling basis. Patients who subsequently do not undergo LT due to waitlist dropout, loss to follow-up, or any other reason will not be followed. Care partners will not participate in the study pre-LT. After LT, the study will assess patients and their care partners at 4 additional time points: 1, 3, 12, and 24 months post-LT. The study will comprehensively assess cognitive, psychological, social, behavioral factors, functional health status, and clinical outcomes of LTRs. Involved care partners will also be assessed, including their self-management skills, specific roles, and the nature of support provided. Pre-LT measures include interview questions, cognitive measures, and electronic health record (EHR) data. Post-LT patient measures include in-person interviews, at-home surveys, ActiGraph-assessed physical activity and sleep, and EHR data. Care partner measures include in-person interviews and at-home surveys.

Recruitment and retention
Research coordinators will prescreen potentially eligible patients in the EHR and confirm eligibility with the local site PI. Pre-LT recruitment will be conducted on waitlisted patients, while post-LT recruitment will be conducted on patients 0–120 days post-LT and their care partners (if the associated patient has enrolled). Patients are not required to have their care partners enroll in the study to participate. Study interviews post-LT will coincide with clinical appointments at 1 3, 12, and 24 months post-LT, with 60-day eligibility windows to accommodate patient/care partner schedules and clinical events. Patients and care partners will each receive $50 per visit ($200 total) for completing assessments that may be available through telephone, mail, or online to maximize recruitment and retention.

Measurements
The study will analyze data on patient and care partner outcomes and behavioral, knowledge, and clinical covariates (Tables 2 and 3). Study data will be collected and managed using a REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) database hosted by the University of Pennsylvania Clinical Research Computing Unit.

TABLE 2 - LivCog patient study measures
Patient study measures and outcomes	Interview time points
Variable	Instrument(s) or measure(s)	Screening pre-LT	Screening post-LT (day 0–90)	1 mo post-LT (day 0–30+30)	3 mo post-LT (day 90±30)	12 mo post-LT (day 360±30)	24 mo post-LT (day 720±30)
Informed consent	Informed consenta	X	X	—	—	—	—
Sociodemographics	Date of birthb	X	Xc	—	—	—	—
Ageb	X	X	—	—	—	—
Addressb	X	X	—	—	—	—
Sex assigned at birthb	X	X	—	—	—	—
Sex identityb	X	X	—	—	—	—
Raceb	X	X	—	—	—	—
Ethnicityb	X	X	—	—	—	—
Marital statusb	X	X	—	—	—	—
Employmentb	X	X	—	—	—	—
Lifetime occupational complexityb	X	X	—	—	—	—
Pre-transplant health status	MELD Scoreg	X	—	—	—	—	—
Liver disease etiologyg	X	—	—	—	—	—
Medical comorbiditiesg	X	—	—	—	—	—
Cognitive Function	HEg	—	X	—	—	—	—
Pattern comparison processing speed (NIH Toolbox)a	Xd	—	X	X	X	X
Flanker inhibitory control/attention (NIH Toolbox)a	Xd	—	X	X	X	X
List sorting working memory (NIH Toolbox)a	Xd	—	X	X	X	X
Picture sequence memory (NIH Toolbox) a	—	—	X	X	X	X
Dimensional change card sort (NIH Toolbox)a	—	—	X	X	X	X
Picture Vocabulary Test (NIH Toolbox)a	—	—	X	X	X	X
Oral Reading Recognition Test (NIH Toolbox)a	—	—	X	X	X	X
Animal Naming Testa	Xe	—	X	X	X	X
Montreal Cognitive Assessment a	Xf	—	X	X	X	X
Rosenbaum Eyesight Testa	—	—	X	X	X	X
Vision and Hearing Questionnaireb	—	—	X	X	X	X
Physical function	Grip strengtha	X	—	X	X	X	X
30-s chair standa	X	—	X	X	X	X
Balance Testa	X	—	X	X	X	X
Liver Frailty Index Calculationb	X	—	X	X	X	X
Most recent height, weight, and BPg	X	—	X	X	X	X
Preoperative variables	Neurologic complicationsg	—	X	—	—	—	—
Transplant surgery variables g	—	X	—	—	—	—
Patient medical history	General historyg	—	X	—	—	—	—
Liver disease g	—	X	—	—	—	—
Kidney disease g	—	X	—	—	—	—
Cardiovascular and metabolic diseaseg	—	X	—	—	—	—
Transplant history	Transplant length of stayg	—	X	—	—	—	—
Hospitalization status g	—	X	—	—	—	—
Discharge destinationg	—	X	—	—	—	—
Self-management	LTKQa	—	—	X	X	X	X
NVSb	—	—	—	X	—	—
ECog-12a	—	—	X	X	X	X
Patient outcomes	PROMIS—Physical Function SF 10a v2.0b	—	—	X	X	X	X
PROMIS—Pain Interference SF 4a v1.0b	—	—	X	X	X	X
PROMIS—Fatigue SF 8a v1.0 b	—	—	X	X	X	X
PROMIS—Depression SF 8a v1.0 b	—	—	X	X	X	X
PROMIS—Anxiety SF 8a v1.0b	—	—	X	X	X	X
PROMIS—Social Isolation SF 4a v2.0b	—	—	X	X	X	X
PROMIS—Instrumental Support SF 8a v2.0b	—	—	X	X	X	X
PROMIS—Emotional Support SF 8a v2.0b	—	—	X	X	X	X
PROMIS—Sleep Disturbance SF 8a v1.0b	—	—	X	X	X	X
Rosenbaum Eyesight Testa	—	—	X	X	X	X
Vision and Hearing Questionnaireb	—	—	X	X	X	X
Health behaviors	CHAIb	—	—	X	X	X	X
BAASISa	—	—	X	X	X	X
PTGIb	—	—	—	X	X	X
COST-FACITb	—	—	X	X	X	X
AUDIT-Cb	—	X	X	X	X	X
Smoking statusb	—	X	X	X	X	X
Sleep journal and ActiGraphy a	—	—	—	X	X	X
Concomitant medicationsb	—	X	X	X	X	X
Clinical outcomes	Variables from EHR	—	—	X	X	X	X
aInterview measures.
bSurvey measures.
cDemographic data do not need to be completed if a participant was enrolled in the pre-LT portion of the study.
dMeasure to be used for in-person pre-LT assessments only.
eAnimal Naming Test to be used for both phone and in-person pre-LT assessments.
fMoCA Blind v8.1 and MoCA Mini v2.1 to be used for phone pre-LT assessments.
Abbreviations: AUDIT-C, Alcohol Use Disorder Identification Test; BAASIS, Basel Assessment of Adherence to Immunosuppressive Medications Scale; COST, Comprehensive Score for Financial Toxicity; ECOG-12, Everyday Cognition Scales; EHR, electronic health record; FACIT, Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy; LT, liver transplantation; LTKQ, Liver Transplant Knowledge Questionnaire; MELD, Model for End-stage Liver Disease; NIH, National Institutes of Health; PTGI, Post-traumatic Growth Inventory; NVS, Newest Vital Sign; PROMIS, Patient-reported Outcomes Measurement Information System; PTGI, Post-traumatic Growth Inventory.

DATA SOURCES
Interviews
Care Partners and Patients will complete a one-time sociodemographics survey at the beginning of the study, which can be done remotely. Pre-LT interviews may be conducted in-person or over the phone. Participants will not be compensated for this part of the study. Pre-LT visits will gather sociodemographic information, health status, cognitive function (see the Cognitive function section), and physical measurements (see the Physical function section). Post-LT interviews for patients and care partners will occur in-person 1, 3, 12, and 24 months post-LT, each with a 60-day window. All interview data will be stored in an online data-capturing software REDCap.

Actigraphy
Post-LT patients will receive an ActiGraph GT3X-BT device after the 3-, 12, and 24-month interview visits have been completed. Actigraphy devices are used to measure acceleration in three axes and calculate total sleep time, intermittent awakenings, and sleep efficiency.48 Participants will wear the device on their nondominant wrist, uncovered, and return it after 8 days and nights, along with a completed consensus sleep diary.49 Deidentified data will then be analyzed for at least 5 days of activity/light data, <2 hours of off-wrist time per 24-hour period, uploaded to secure servers, and manually scored by trained professionals.50 If the requirements are not met, patients will be asked to wear the device again.

EHR data
EHR data will be collected over the entire study duration or up to 2 years post-transplant for each participant and entered into the REDCap database. UPenn, Northwestern, and Baylor use a similar EHR platform (Epic Systems, Verona, WI). Data collected from the EHR will include medication lists corroborated by patient reports, blood pressure, labs (including hepatic function panels, basic metabolic panel, international normalized ratio, gamma-glutamyltransferase, lipid panel, and hemoglobin A1C values), tacrolimus immunosuppression coefficient of variation (CoV), and clinical outcomes questions. Relevant ranges will be selected in accordance with local site regulations.

PATIENT MEASUREMENTS
Table 2 summarizes patient measurements.

Sociodemographics
Sociodemographic information includes age, date of birth, address, sex assigned at birth, sex identity, race/ethnicity, education, marital status, income, employment, and occupational complexity. Lifetime occupational complexity will be used to measure premorbid cognitive function.22,23 These will be collected during interviews or as a survey.

Pretransplant health status
Liver disease severity [measured by a Model for End-stage Liver Disease (MELD) score at LT (includes sodium, total bilirubin, INR, and serum creatinine)], liver disease etiology (eg, alcohol and hepatitis C), and medical comorbidities that could affect cognitive function (diabetes, hypertension, obesity, alcohol use, social isolation, smoking, etc.) will be assessed using the EHR.

Cognitive function
The study measures cognitive functioning using the Animal Naming Test (ANT), Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) exam, and NIH Toolbox Cognition Battery (NIHTB-CB). The ANT primarily measures executive functioning and is administered to patients’ pre-LT and post-LT at all time points.51 The ANT can be completed in person or over the phone during pre-LT.

The MoCA exam is administered to patients’ pre-LT and post-LT at all time points. The MoCA Full v8.152 is administered to patients’ pre-LT and post-LT patients during interviews. The MoCA Mini v2.153 and MoCA Blind v8.154 are only administered to patients’ pre-LT and over the phone. The MoCA Mini and MoCA Blind offer patients a more convenient mechanism to participate in the study to attract a more diverse sample of participants.

The NIHTB-CB (a set of computer-based tests designed for rapid assessment of cognitive status across the lifespan and developed for use with an Apple iPad) will be administered at all time points post-LT.55 Individual tests in the NIHTB-CB battery include the Flanker Inhibitory Control/Attention, Picture Sequence Memory, List Sorting Working Memory, Dimensional Change Card Sort, and Pattern Comparison Processing Speed. They will be used to measure attention, executive function, episodic memory, working memory, and processing speed, respectively.56,57 The Picture Vocabulary Test and the Oral Reading Recognition Test will be used to measure language reception and expression, respectively.57 We will compare NIHTB-CB measures to normative data (fully corrected T-scores) derived from a representative sample of the US population of 4859 participants and adjusted for age, sex, race/ethnicity, and educational attainment. We will also evaluate uncorrected T-scores that evaluate test performance to the NIHTB nationally representative population. Pre-LT participants will complete an abbreviated NIHTB-CB battery (pattern comparison processing speed, flanker inhibitory control/attention, and list sorting working memory) if the interview is being done in-person, while post-LT participants will complete all 7 measures at all time points. Pre-LT interviews conducted over the phone will not complete NIHTB-CB measures.

Pre-LT HE will be assessed using the EHR to investigate the severity grade I-IV by West Haven criteria, prescriptions used to treat HE, and the number of hospitalizations.58

Physical function
We will assess pre-LT and post-LT physical frailty at all time points. Strength will be assessed using the dominant hand, hand-held dynamometer grip strength (Jamar+ Digital Dynamometer) and using an average of 3 age-adjusted and sex-adjusted measures. The validated liver frailty index will be calculated from combined grip strength, balance, and time chair stand measures to classify patients as frail (liver frailty index≥4.5), pre-frail (3.2–<4.5), and robust (<3.2).59

Preoperative variables
We will obtain EHR data on variables that may impact early neurocognitive complications and recovery such as pre/post-LT infection, LT surgery duration, blood product volume/type, reoperation within 30 days, pre/post-LT intensive care unit length of stay and mechanical ventilation, and renal replacement therapy.

Transplant history
Transplant hospitalization length of stay, hospitalization status, and discharge location will be assessed using the EHR.

Self-management
Self-management will be measured by the Liver Transplant Knowledge Questionnaire (LTKQ) and Everyday Cognition Scales as surveys at all time points post-LT.60 The LTKQ is a performance-based survey to comprehensively and objectively measure the skills necessary to navigate the health care system, including (1) recall of spoken information, (2) comprehension and recall of written and multimedia communications, (3) medication organization and dosing, and (4) health care problem-solving. On the basis of patient performance in 9 common hypothetical health scenarios, the final measure contains 10 items with total scores ranging from 0 to 19. Health literacy will be assessed using the Newest Vital Sign during the 3-month post-transplant interview visit.61

Patient outcomes
Patient-reported outcomes will be assessed as surveys post-LT at all time points using the Patient-reported Outcomes Measurement Information System short-form measures of physical function, pain, fatigue, depression, anxiety, social isolation, instrumental support, emotional support, and sleep disturbance.62 Hearing and vision will be assessed using the Rosenbaum pocket vision screener and self-report surveys.

Health behaviors
Transplant adherence will be assessed with the validated Basel Assessment of Adherence to Immunosuppressive Medications Scale and tacrolimus immunosuppression coefficient of variation at all time points.63–65 Physical Activity and Sleep Quality will be assessed using the ActiGraph wGT3X-BT (see the Actigraphy section) at all time points except 1 month post-LT. Alcohol intake assessed through the 3-item Alcohol Use Disorder Identification Test assessment,66 self-reported tobacco and marijuana use, and financial survivorship assessed using the Comprehensive Score for Financial Toxicity–Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy (FACIT) will be assessed as surveys at all time points post-LT.67 Post-traumatic growth assessed using the Post-Traumatic Growth Inventory68 will be administered as a survey 3, 12, and 24 months post-LT.

Clinical outcomes
Information on days hospitalized, days alive and out of hospital, liver graft rejection, liver graft loss, and post-transplant infections will be measured by EHR.69,70 Mortality will be obtained prospectively from the EHR, and we will generate a composite morbidity/mortality clinical endpoint, including late acute/chronic rejection, graft failure, and mortality.

CARE PARTNER MEASUREMENTS
Table 3 summarizes Care Partner measurements. Surveys will be used to measure sociodemographics (see the Patient measurements and Sociodemographic sections), health care navigation measured by the LTKQ, self-efficacy measured by the Caregiver Inventory, care partner preparedness measured by the modified Caregiver Healthcare Task Difficulty and Preparedness Scale, care partner burden measured by the Zarit Burden Interview Short Form, and Community Participation measured using selected items from the National Study of Caregiving assessment at all time points.71–74 Health literacy will be assessed using the Newest Vital Sign during the 3-month post-transplant interview visit.61

TABLE 3 - LivCog care partner study measures
Care partner measures and outcomes	Interview time points
Variable	Instrument(s) or measure(s)	Screening post-LT (day 0–90)	1 mo post-LT (day 0–30 +30)	3 mopost-LT (day 90±30)	12 mo post-LT (day 360±30)	24 mo post-LT (day 720±30)
Informed consent	Informed consenta	X	—	—	—	—
Sociodemographics	Date of birthb	X	—	—	—	—
Ageb	X	—	—	—	—
Addressb	X	—	—	—	—
Sex assigned at birthb	X	—	—	—	—
Sex identityb	X	—	—	—	—
Raceb	X	—	—	—	—
Ethnicityb	X	—	—	—	—
Marital statusb	X	—	—	—	—
Employmentb	X	—	—	—	—
Lifetime occupational complexityb	X	—	—	—	—
Health literacy	Newest vital signa	—	—	X	—	—
Health care navigation skills	LTKQb	—	X	X	X	X
Self-efficacy	CGIb	—	X	X	X	X
Cognitive function	HEb	—	X	X	X	X
Care partner preparedness	Modified Caregiver Healthcare Task Difficulty and Preparedness Scaleb	—	X	X	X	X
Nature and intensity of care provided	Relationship to patientb	—	X	X	X	X
Hours of care providedb	—	X	X	X	X
Duration of responsibilitiesb	—	X	X	X	X
Nature of assistance providedb	—	X	X	X	X
Care partner burdenb	ZBI-12	—	X	X	X	X
Community Participationb	NSOC	—	X	X	X	X
aInterview measures.
bSurvey measures.
Abbreviations: CGI, caregiver inventory; LT, liver transplantation; LTKQ, Liver Transplant Knowledge Questionnaire; NSOC, National Study of Caregiving; ZBI-12, Zarit Burden Interview Short Form.

Data analysis plan
Aim 1: Assess cognitive trajectories from pre-liver transplant to 2 years post-liver transplant, and identify risk factors for poor cognitive function among a diverse sample of de novo liver transplant recipients.

H1: Compared to age-matched comparators, LTRs will demonstrate poorer cognitive function across “fluid” domains of executive function, processing speed, and memory.

Each domain of “fluid” cognitive function (eg, attention, executive function, episodic memory, working memory, and processing speed) will be analyzed separately. For each patient, at each time point, we will subtract the cognitive function value from the normative data such that the response variable is coded as deviation from the norm. We will then test the null hypothesis that the difference-in-means equals 0 against the 1-sided alternative hypothesis that the mean is <0. To provide as complete a picture as possible, we will carry out this hypothesis test using: (1) pre-LT measures, (2) all 4 post-LT measures viewed as longitudinal data, and (3) time point–specific measures. For (2), robust standard errors will account for correlation among measures within-patient. The afore-listed sequence of models will enable us to determine if cognitive function is impaired among LT recipients and, if so, at what time post-LT.

H2: Premorbid and pre-LT cognitive function, older age, alcohol-associated liver disease, and metabolic/cardiovascular comorbidities will be associated with poorer cognition, trajectories of delayed or limited cognitive recovery, and the presence of a persistent cognitive impairment.

There will be 2 sets of analyses for Aim 1 (H2). The first set of analyses will use linear mixed models to estimate the effects of risk factors, focusing on those listed in H2. The pre-LT cognitive function measures (“fluid” and “crystallized”) will be used as adjustment covariates. The second set of analyses will utilize recently developed latent class mixed models to estimate and then group cognitive function trajectories. The approach involves simultaneously estimating group membership probability and within-group trajectories. Although all patients will experience some degree of cognitive impairment shortly after LT, we hypothesize that patients can be clustered into 1 of the 3 mutually exclusive groups based on their trajectories. Group 1 will steadily recover cognitive function. Group 2 will initially trend toward recovering cognitive function, and then, experience declines. Group 3 will simply not recover cognitive function, plateauing after perhaps a brief but transient recovery. The main deliverable from this group-based trajectory approach will be the determination of the factors predicting membership in each of the 3 groups.

Aim 2: Evaluate associations between cognitive function and self-management skills, health behaviors, functional health status, and post-liver transplant outcomes among de novo liver transplant recipients.

H3: Poorer cognition and impairment will be associated with weaker self-management skills, worse functional status, inadequate treatment adherence, and adverse post-LT outcomes.

Primary analyses are described for 4 outcomes: self-management (LTKQ score), medication adherence, post-LT health status (physical function, and frailty), and days hospitalized. For each outcome, measures of cognitive function will be coded as lagged time-dependent covariates. LTKQ score, adherence, and health status are all continuous and, as such, will be analyzed through linear mixed models. Days hospitalized will be modeled using the proportional rates model (ie, Cox regression analog for recurrent event data). Standard errors will be based on a robust (sandwich) variance estimator, to account for days hospitalized being correlated within-subject. For this model, follow-up will stop at death or graft failure. The supplementary analysis will model days alive and out of hospital over time using mixed logistic regression.

Aim 3: Investigate potential mediators and moderators of associations between cognitive function and post-liver transplant outcomes among “de novo” liver transplant recipients.

H4: Physical inactivity, inadequate treatment adherence, poorer sleep quality, and impaired self-management skills will mediate associations between poor cognitive function and adverse health outcomes.

We will employ mediation analysis for this Aim. In particular, the exposure will be cognitive function measured at month 4, the outcomes will be patient-reported outcomes and functional health status at month 24. The potential mediators that we will test will be sleep quality, physical activity, and self-management at month 12. This temporal relation is amenable to mediation analysis. Since exposures and outcomes are continuous, we will fit linear regression models with and without mediator variables. The null hypothesis of no mediation will be tested with a z-score defined as the difference in parameter estimates divided by the SD of said difference. To improve the accuracy of our inference, the p-value will be computed through a nonparametric bootstrap. Within the analysis for each outcome, we will evaluate each potential mediator (eg, physical activity, treatment adherence, sleep quality, and self-management skill) individually. Secondary analyses of H4 will utilize causal mediation methods. Any meaningful differences between the primary and secondary analysis of H4 will require careful scrutiny and sensitivity analysis.

H5: Greater care partner involvement and care partner health literacy will moderate associations.

Cognitive function variables will be coded as time-varying exposures, as well as care partner involvement and self-management skills. Separate models will be fitted for each health outcome (eg, patient-reported outcomes, adherence, and days hospitalized). Generalized estimating equations will be used to model patient-reported outcomes and treatment adherence, while the proportional rates model will be used for days hospitalized. Each model will include cognitive function (exposure), care partner, adjustment covariates, and product terms between cognitive function and care partner (through which moderation, by care partner, of cognitive function’s effect on outcomes will be tested). Temporality with respect to exposures/moderators and outcomes will be preserved by lagging the former by 1 time-period.

Plans to address sex as a biologic variable
We will explicitly examine sex differences in cognitive function, cognitive trajectories, and all relevant outcomes of interest.

Strategies to Deal with Bias/Missing Data/Attrition and Loss to Follow-up.

If dropout exceeds the 10% we project, we will use the inverse probability of censoring weighting such that the weighted complete data represent the study sample. Multiple imputation, with 10 imputed data sets, will be used to impute missing values for covariates and outcomes with missingness >10% with PROC MI and PROC MIANALYZE (SAS, v9.4).