Sepsis is defined as life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by dysregulated host response to infection (1). Despite the progress made in medical management over the past few decades, sepsis remains an important global health problem causing millions of deaths around the world (2,3). One essential facet of sepsis management is the administration of appropriate antimicrobials. Multiple lines of evidence have shown that failure or delay in the administration of appropriate antimicrobials is associated with substantial increases in the mortality of sepsis (4–9). On the basis of the evidence, the Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines recommended empiric broad-spectrum therapy to cover all likely pathogens as soon as possible after sepsis is recognized (10,11).
Broad-spectrum beta-lactam antibiotics are commonly 
used as empiric therapy for sepsis (12). Among 
them, carbapenems offer an exceptionally broad spectrum 
of antimicrobial activity. The existing evidence 
suggests that carbapenems are associated with relatively 
low mortality in several infectious diseases, especially 
those caused by extended-spectrum beta-lactamase 
(ESBL)-producing pathogens (13, 14). For these reasons, 
carbapenems are the preferably used antibiotics 
for the initial treatment of sepsis, and consumption 
of carbapenem has been reported to be increasing in 
different parts of the world (15–17). However, indiscriminate 
use of carbapenems against sepsis should be 
avoided because it has contributed to the emergence 
of multidrug-resistant pathogens (18, 19). Therefore, 
updating knowledge on the efficacy of alternative empiric 
regimens for sepsis is required. 

The fourth-generation cephalosporins, such as 
cefepime and cefpirome, and piperacillin/tazobactam 

are nearly equal to carbapenems in antimicrobial activity 
and thus are considered alternative therapies 
against sepsis. Previous studies have evaluated the 
efficacy of carbapenems compared with these antibiotics 
against several specific pathogens, such as 
Acinetobacter species and ESBL-producing Escherichia 
coli (20–23). However, there is little evidence of the 
efficacy of carbapenems against unidentified mixed 
pathogens. Causative pathogens are not usually identified 
at the time of initiating antibiotics in sepsis 
because of the strong recommendation to initiate immediate 
treatment, ideally within 1 hour after sepsis 
is first suspected (11). Thus, there is a significant need 
to comprehensively evaluate differences in mortality 
and morbidities between carbapenems versus noncarbapenem 
broad-spectrum antibiotics as initial treatment 
of sepsis, including various underlying infectious 
diseases and causative pathogens. This study aimed to 
evaluate mortality and morbidities in patients with 
community-acquired sepsis treated with carbapenems 
as initial antibiotic therapy compared with those 
treated with noncarbapenem antibiotics. 

MATERIALS AND METHODS 

Design and Setting 

This retrospective observational study used a part of 
large-scale database covering approximately 23% of 
acute-care hospitals in Japan that contained about 
30 million patients as of October 2019 (provided 
by Medical Data Vision (MDV) Co., Tokyo, Japan; 
https://en.mdv.co.jp/about-mdv-database/) (24). The 
database consists of Japanese administrative claims 
data and includes data on age, sex, primary diagnoses, 
concomitant diagnoses, complication diagnoses, 
procedures, drug administrations, discharge status, 
and laboratory tests. The diagnoses are recorded in 
this database using the International Classification of 
Diseases, Tenth Revision (ICD-10) codes. From the 
original MDV database, we extracted the clinical data 
of 534,739 patients who required unplanned admissions 
to 42 hospitals that recorded the laboratory data 
from February 2006 to December 2019. 

This study followed the principles of the Declaration 
of Helsinki and the Strengthening the Reporting of 
Observational Studies in Epidemiology guideline. 
The study protocol was approved by the Institutional 
Review Board for Clinical Research of Osaka General 

Medical Center (IRB No. S201916015, Study title: 
Evaluation of clinical issues in emergency and intensive 
care medicine using medical big data, approved on 
July 7, 2020). The board waived the requirement for 
informed consent because of the anonymous nature of 
the data. 

Participants 

Patients were eligible for this study if they met all of 
the following criteria: 1) required unplanned hospital 
admission, 2) were not transferred from other hospitals, 
3) were older than 18 years at the time of admission, 
4) were diagnosed as having sepsis, and 5) 
received IV broad-spectrum beta-lactam antibiotics as 
initial antibiotic therapy within 24 hours from hospital 
admission. 

Sepsis was defined as having a proven/suspected 
infection and the development of organ dysfunction. 
In this study, the original ICD-9 codes for infection 
and organ dysfunction by Angus et al (25, 26) were 
adapted to corresponding ICD-10 codes by previously 
published methods. The sensitivity and specificity of 
ICD-10 codes to detect sepsis were reported to be 35% 
and 98%, respectively (27). An infection was defined 
as having any of the infection-related ICD-10 codes in 
the primary diagnosis, and organ dysfunction was defined 
as having any of the organ-dysfunction-related 
ICD-10 codes in the primary, concomitant, or complication 
diagnoses (Supplementary Table S1, http:// 
links.lww.com/CCM/H346). Broad-spectrum betalactam 
antibiotics in this study included carbapenems, 
fourth-generation cephalosporins, and tazobactam/ 
piperacillin. 

Exclusion criteria included patients who died within 
24 hours after admission and concomitantly received 
carbapenems and other broad-spectrum beta-lactams. 
We also excluded data from the second and subsequent 
hospitalizations of patients who were hospitalized 
multiple times during the study period and used 
only the data from the first hospitalization. 

We divided the study patients into two following 
groups: patients who received carbapenems as initial 
treatment (carbapenem group) and patients who received 
the noncarbapenem broad-spectrum agents (i.e., 
fourth-generation cephalosporins or tazobactam/piperacillin) 
as initial treatment (noncarbapenem group). To 
evaluate the effect of antibiotics as “initial treatment of 
sepsis,” patients whose antibiotics were switched from 

noncarbapenem beta-lactams to carbapenems were categorized 
into the noncarbapenem group, and patients 
whose antibiotics were switched from carbapenems to 
noncarbapenem beta-lactams were categorized into the 
carbapenem group. As in previous studies, we defined 
the “escalation” and “de-escalation” of antibiotics based 
on ranking according to the activity spectrum against 
Gram-negative bacteria (28, 29). Namely, switching 
from noncarbapenems to carbapenems was regarded as 
escalation, and switching from carbapenems to noncarbapenems 
was regarded as de-escalation. 

Data Collection 

We collected the following data: age, sex, height, 
weight, Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) (30), site 
of infection, use of catecholamines, use of mechanical 
ventilation, and laboratory tests. We used predefined 
ICD-10 coding algorithms for evaluating CCI (31). 
The renal, hepatic, and coagulation subscores of the 
Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) were 
calculated based on creatinine levels, total bilirubin 
levels, and platelet counts. 

Outcomes 

The primary outcome was all-cause in-hospital mortality. 
The following secondary outcomes were: 1) occurrence 
rate of acute kidney injury (AKI), 2) occurrence rate of 
enterocolitis due to Clostridium difficile, 3) prevalence 
of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) 
infection or methicillin-resistant coagulase-negative 
Staphylococci (MRCNS) infection, 4) prevalence of multidrug-
resistant pathogens infection, 5) rate of patients 
who received antibiotics for more than of multidrugresistant 
pathogens infection, 5) rate of patients who received 
antibiotics for more than 7 days, 6) rate of patients 
who received antibiotics for more than 14 days, 7) rate 
of patients who received broad-spectrum antibiotics for 
more than 7 days, and 8) rate of patients who received 
broad-spectrum antibiotics for more than 14 days. 

AKI was diagnosed based on serum creatinine levels 
from the Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes 
(KDIGO) criteria, when serum creatinine increases by 

0.3 mg/dL or more in 48 hours or rises to at least 1.5 times 
from baseline within 7 days, in patients without chronic 
kidney diseases requiring chronic maintenance dialysis 
(32). Enterocolitis caused by C. difficile was diagnosed 
when patients received ICD-10 code A04.7 and were 

administered oral vancomycin or metronidazole from 
7 days after admission. The sensitivity and specificity of 
ICD-10 codes for C. difficile infection were reported to 
be 35.6% and 99.9%, respectively (33). Similarly, MRSA 
and MRCNS infections were diagnosed when patients 
received the ICD-10 codes A04.8, A41.0, A41.1, A49.0, 
A49.0, G00.3, I33.0, J15.2, J15.2, J85.2, J86.9, K65.0, 
M00.01, M00.02, M00.05, M00.06, M00.09, M86.99, 
N30.8, T81.4, or Z22.8, and they were administered IV 
anti-MRSA agents, including arbekacin, daptomycin, 
linezolid, teicoplanin, and vancomycin from 7 days after 
admission. In this study, multidrug-resistant pathogens 
included multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas species and 
multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter species, which were 
diagnosed in accordance with ICD-10 codes A49.8, 
A49.1, and A49.9 and the diagnosis name determined 
from 7 days after admission. Broad-spectrum antibiotics 
included carbapenems, fourth-generation cephalosporins, 
tazobactam/piperacillin, and third- and 
fourth-generation quinolones. 

Statistical Analysis 

Due to the retrospective nature of this study, imbalances 
in the covariates at baseline between the groups 
were assumed to be present. To account for this imbalance, 
we used a propensity score method for inverse 
probability treatment weighting (IPTW). The 
propensity score was determined using logistic regression 
with the 23 variables assumed to be associated 
with carbapenem use as covariates (Supplementary 
Table S2, http://links.lww.com/CCM/H346). The 
C-statistic was calculated to evaluate the goodness of 
fit. Additionally, the distribution of propensity scores 
in each group was graphically compared to assess the 
overlap assumption. 

Descriptive statistics were calculated as group 
means with sds for continuous variables and as frequencies 
with percentages for categorical variables. 
Standardized mean difference (SMD) was used to examine 
the balance of patient characteristics between 
the two groups before and after IPTW adjustment, 
where greater than 0.1 was considered imbalance. 

An IPTW-adjusted logistic regression model was 
leveraged to assess the association between treatment 
and mortality. In the sensitivity analysis, we applied 
two more logistic regression models: a doubly robust 
augmented IPTW-adjusted logistic model (34–37), 

and a multivariate logistic model adjusted by the 
23 covariates used to calculate the propensity score. 
Furthermore, we evaluated the differences in survival 
benefit between 1) carbapenems and tazobactam/ 
piperacillin, 2) carbapenems and fourth-generation 
cephalosporins, 3) meropenem and tazobactam/piperacillin, 
and 4) meropenem and fourth-generation 
cephalosporins separately. We also fitted logistic regression 
models adjusted by IPTW method to evaluate 
the survival benefit of carbapenem therapy in several 
subsets, including; 1) older (= 70 yr) versus younger 
(< 70 yr) patients, 2) serum C-reactive protein (CRP) 
level of greater than or equal to 15.0 mg/dL versus less 
than 15.0 mg/dL, 3) CCI of greater than or equal to 5 
versus less than or equal to 4, 4) septic shock versus 
nonshock, 5) general wards versus ICUs, 6) with mechanical 
ventilation versus without mechanical ventilation, 
7) anatomical sites of infection, 8) admission 
during the first half versus the second half of the study 
period, 9) without switching of antibiotics (i.e., from 
carbapenems to noncarbapenems or from noncarbapenems 
to carbapenems) within 3 days, 10) without 
switching of antibiotics within 7 days, and 11) without 
switching of antibiotics within 14 days after initiation 
of antibiotic therapies in the patients. 

In this study, septic shock was diagnosed when 
patients were administered IV catecholamine on the 
day of hospital admission. The categories of subgroups 
were determined before extracting the study data, but 
the cutoff points were determined after extracting the 
data to allow well-balanced stratifications. To evaluate 
the effect modification of these factors on the survival 
effect associated with carbapenems, we included crossproduct 
terms between these factors and carbapenem 
therapy as covariates of the regression analyses. In the 
subsets based on the site of infection, effect modifications 
were evaluated in relation to patients with respiratory 
infection as a reference subset. For sensitivity 
analysis in the subgroup analyses, we also estimated 
the survival association of carbapenem in the subsets 
by multivariable logistic regression models adjusted 
by the covariates. The impact of carbapenem therapy 
on the secondary outcomes was estimated by logistic 
regression analyses adjusted by IPTW. Missing values 
were not imputed in the regression models. 

All statistical inferences were two-sided, and a p value 
of less than 0.05 indicated statistical significance. Because 
of the underpowered nature of the interaction analysis, 

we used a significance level of 0.20 with statistical inferences 
for the effect modifications. All statistical analyses 
were conducted using Stata Data Analysis and Statistical 
Software version 17.0 (StataCorp, College Station, TX). 

RESULTS 

Study Population 

Among 534,739 patients in the study registry, 122,843 
were adults, were admitted from outside the hospitals, 
and were diagnosed as having infectious diseases. 
Among them, 36,785 patients were diagnosed as having 
sepsis at the time of hospital admission, and we included 
7,907 patients who received broad-spectrum 
beta-lactam antibiotics within 24 hours from admission. 
After excluding 515 patients who met the exclusion criteria, 
we included 7,392 patients in the final study cohort. 
The carbapenem group comprised 3,547 patients, 
and the noncarbapenem group comprised 3,845 patients 
(Fig. 1). Supplementary Figure S1 (http://links.lww. 

initiation of antibiotic therapies, 3.7% (130 of 3,547 
patients) in the carbapenem group had been switched 
to noncarbapenem beta-lactams, and 7.1% (272 of 
3,845 patients) in the noncarbapenem group had 
been switched to carbapenems. 

Supplementary Table S5 (http://links.lww.com/ 
CCM/H346) shows the baseline characteristics of the 
two groups before and after IPTW adjustment. Patients 
in the carbapenem group were slightly younger (mean, 

73.8 vs 72.5 yr old, SMD = 1.1414). There were no 
significant differences in sex ratio (males, 61.6% vs 
females, 59.6%; SMD = 0.0417). The rates of septic 
shock, mechanical ventilation use, ICU admission, and 
renal replacement therapy were significantly higher in 
the carbapenem group. Similarly, renal, coagulation, 
and hepatic SOFA subscores were all significantly 
higher in the carbapenem group. After IPTW adjustment, 
the SMDs of all parameters between the two 
groups were less than 0.1, indicating that patient baseline 
characteristics, use of antifungals, and use of concomitant 
antibiotics, including anti-MRSA agents and 
com/CCM/H346) shows 
the distributions of propensity 
scores in the two 
groups. The C-statistic 
for the fit of the propensity 
scores was 0.677. 
The frequency of administration 
of each antibiotic 
agent is summarized 
in Supplementary 
Table S3 (http://links. 
lww.com/CCM/H346). 
Meropenem and tazobactam/
piperacillin were the 
most commonly used in 
each group (76.8% and 
82.1%, respectively). 

Numbers and cumulative 
numbers of antibiotics-
switched patients 
on each day from the 
initiation of primary 
antibiotics are shown 
in Supplementary 
Table S4 (http://links. 
lww.com/CCM/H346). 
Within 14 days after the 

Figure 1. Patient flow diagram. ICD-10 = International Classification of Diseases Tenth Revision, 
ICD-9 = International Classification of Diseases, Nineth Revision. 

quinolones, were well balanced between the groups 
after IPTW adjustment. As there were no missing data 
in the ICD-10 code and receipt data in the study database, 
data on the preexisting comorbidities, site of 
infection, and concomitant therapies were not missing. 
We show the rates of missing data for the demographic 
and laboratory data in Supplementary Table 
S6 (http://links.lww.com/CCM/H346). 

Effect of Carbapenem Therapy on Survival 

The survival odds ratios (ORs) associated with carbapenem 
therapy adjusted by the three logistic regression 
models are shown in Figure 2. There were no 

significant differences between the groups in all three 
models. Similarly, there were no significant differences 
in mortality between carbapenems and tazobactam/ 
piperacillin, between carbapenems and fourth-generation 
cephalosporins, between meropenem and tazobactam/
piperacillin, and between meropenem and 
fourth-generation cephalosporins (Supplementary 
Fig. S2, http://links.lww.com/CCM/H346). 

A summary of survival benefits associated with carbapenems 
in the subgroups is shown in Figure 3. There 
were significant multiplicative effect modifications between 
septic shock and nonshock patients (p < 0.001), 
between patients admitted in general wards and ICUs 
(p = 0.014), and between patients with and without 

Figure 2. Differences in in-hospital mortality between the carbapenem and noncarbapenem groups as evaluated by three logistic 
regression models. AIPTW = augmented inverse probability treatment weighting, IPTW = inverse probability treatment weighting, 
OR = odds ratio. 


Figure 3. Differences in in-hospital mortality between the carbapenem and noncarbapenem groups in several subsets according to 
patient characteristics. CRP = C-reactive protein, CCI = Charlson Comorbidity Index, OR = odds ratio.

mechanical ventilation (p = 0.105). Significant associations 
between carbapenem therapy and lower mortality 
were observed in the subsets of septic shock (OR 
0.49; 95% CI, 0.34–0.71), ICU admission (OR 0.57; 
95% CI, 0.38–0.85), and mechanical ventilation (OR 
0.65; 95% CI, 0.43–0.99), whereas risks of death were 
similar between the groups in the nonshock, general 
wards, and nonmechanical ventilation subsets. In contrast, 
there were no significant effect modifications by 
age, CRP, CCI, and admission date. We show the results 
of sensitivity analyses evaluating survival benefits associated 
with carbapenem therapy in the subgroups 
using logistic regression analyses adjusted by covariates 
in Supplementary Figure S3 (http://links.lww. 
com/CCM/H346). Survival benefits associated with 
carbapenem therapy in the subgroups were similar to 
those in the IPTW analyses. Similarly, there were no 
significant differences in survival associated with carbapenem 
therapy in the three subsets excluding those 
patients in whom antibiotics were switched. 

Association Between Carbapenem Therapy and 
Secondary Outcomes 

The secondary outcomes are summarized in Figure 4. 
The adjusted risk of MRSA/MRCNS infection was significantly 
higher in the carbapenem group (adjusted 
OR 1.45; p = 0.011). The adjusted risks of AKI, enterocolitis 
due to C. difficile, and MRSA/MRCNS infection 
were not different between the groups. The rates of 
patients who received antibiotics for more than 7 days 
and 14 days were significantly higher in the carbapenem 
groups (adjusted OR 1.19; p = 0.001 and adjusted 
OR 1.25; p = 0.001, respectively). Similarly, the rates of 
patients who received broad-spectrum antibiotics for 
more than 7 days and 14 days were significantly higher 
in the carbapenem groups (adjusted OR 1.17; p = 0.002 
and adjusted OR 1.24; p = 0.007, respectively). 

DISCUSSION 

Rapid administration of appropriate antimicrobials is 
essential for reducing mortality in sepsis (6). As causative 
pathogens are not usually confirmed when initiating 
antibiotics, updated knowledge is strongly required 
on the efficacy associated with the initial empiric use 
of broad-spectrum antibiotics. This nationwide multicenter 
study compared carbapenems with other 
broad-spectrum beta-lactams as initial therapy and 

revealed the following: 1) initial use of carbapenems 
was not associated with significantly lower mortality 
overall in patients with sepsis, 2) a survival benefit associated 
with carbapenem was observed in patients 
with septic shock, in ICUs, or with mechanical ventilation, 
and 3) carbapenem therapy was associated with 
a significantly higher risk of MRSA/MRCNS infection 
and longer use of antibiotics. 

Differences Between Carbapenem and 
Noncarbapenems 

The fourth-generation cephalosporins and piperacillin/
tazobactam exhibit broad spectrums of antibacterial 
activity against most aerobic bacteria (21, 
38). However, several concerns might limit the clinical 
effectiveness of these agents compared with carbapenems. 
First, carbapenems possess an even wider 
antibacterial spectrum compared with the noncarbapenem 
broad-spectrum agents. For example, in 
common with other cephalosporins, fourth-generation 
cephalosporins have limited inhibitory activity 
against nonfermentative bacteria and minimal activity 
against Enterococci and anaerobic bacteria (39). 

Second, the efficacy of the noncarbapenem agents 
is considered to be inferior to carbapenems against 
several drug-resistant pathogens such as AmpC 
beta-lactamase-producing and ESBL-producing 
Enterobacteriaceae. Especially, ESBL-producing 
Enterobacteriaceae is one of the main targets for antibiotic 
treatment because of the global increase in 
its community prevalence (40). Although noncarbapenem 
beta-lactams are frequently active in vitro 
against ESBL, several previous studies suggested that 
these agents were associated with suboptimal clinical 
outcomes to carbapenems for the treatment of ESBL 
infections (41–43). However, approximately 12% of 

E. coli and 6% of Klebsiella pneumoniae were reported 
to produce ESBL in Japan, which might not be high 
enough to cause the differences in survival benefit between 
carbapenem and the other beta lactams (44). 
Actually, carbapenems were not associated with significantly 
lower mortality overall in the patients in 
this study. However, mechanical ventilation and septic 
shock were reported to be associated with a higher 
prevalence of ESBL-producing pathogens (45), which 
might explain the difference in survival benefits associated 
with carbapenem therapy observed in several of 
the subsets. 

In this context, carbapenem therapy is considered to Optimal Target for Carbapenem Therapy 
be a safer choice especially when causative pathogens are 
not confirmed. Furthermore, our finding of an association Although carbapenems have potentially higher efficacy as 
between carbapenems and lower mortality in the subset initial therapies in sepsis, their indiscriminate use should 
of septic shock is consistent with that in a previous study, be avoided because the extremely higher selective preswhich 
reported that the association between early admin-sure would increase the risk of drug resistance (18, 19, 
istration of antibiotics and mortality was stronger among 47). Actually, carbapenem use has been globally reported 
patients with rather than without septic shock (46). to be associated with a significant increase in the risk 

of carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (48). The 
global spread of drug-resistant pathogens associated with 
the liberal use of broad-spectrum antibiotics has become 
a serious public health problem (49). Approximately 
4%–14% of Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections in the 
United States and 2.1%–4.1% in Italy were reported to be 
caused by multidrug-resistant strains (50). In nationwide 
multicenter surveillance conducted in Japan, the prevalence 
of multidrug-resistant P. aeruginosa was reported to 
be 2.4%, which was comparable to that in other countries 
(51). Some investigators warn that effective antibiotics 
may not be available in the near future because the pipeline 
of new antibiotics is drying up despite the increasing 
prevalence of resistant bacteria (52). 

This study also showed that the use of carbapenems as 
initial therapy was associated with a significant increase 
in the rate of the prolonged use of antibiotics. Although 
patient backgrounds would influence the length of antibiotic 
therapy, a treatment duration of 7–10 days is generally 
adequate for sepsis. For example, recent guidelines 
for pneumonia recommend a 7-day course of antibiotic 
therapy (53). In the present study, 2190 of 3394 patients 
(64.5%) in the carbapenem group received antibiotic 
therapy for more than 7 days, and 725 of 3319 patients 
(21.8%) received antibiotic therapy for even more than 
14 days, which were significantly higher compared with 
the durations in the noncarbapenem group. Although 
there is no clear explanation as to why carbapenems 
were associated with the longer duration of antibiotic 
therapy, such administration might cause a further increase 
in the risk of drug-resistant pathogens. 

Therefore, the decision to use carbapenems should 
be carefully considered after selecting the optimal targets 
that could receive the maximum benefit from such 
therapy. The present study also showed multiplicative 
effect modifications of carbapenem therapy on mortality 
according to the presence of shock and the requirement 
for mechanical ventilation, suggesting that 
higher severity might be a key component in selecting 
those patients expected to receive the maximum 
survival benefit associated with initial carbapenem 
therapy. Further prospective controlled studies are 
needed to confirm or refute these findings. 

Strengths of This Study 

This study has several strengths. First, there is little 
evidence so far of the efficacy of carbapenems as an 

initial choice of antibiotic therapy against an overall 
sepsis population that includes various sites of infection 
and pathogens. Therefore, this study provides 
a novel insight into empiric antibiotic therapy at the 
time of initiating antibiotics when causative pathogens 
are not usually identified. Second, the large sample 
size allowed us to explore the efficacy of carbapenem 
by taking a large number of confounding factors into 
account, which enhanced the robustness of the methods 
and minimized biases. 

Limitations 

This study has several limitations. First, the diagnoses 
recorded in administrative claims databases are generally 
less accurate than those in prospective studies. 
Second, selection bias may exist due to the data extraction 
and study inclusion criteria, which did not 
include patients whose laboratory data were not recorded 
in the database and patients who received concomitant 
beta lactams. Third, baseline characteristics 
and severity of illness were different between the two 
groups. We adjusted the imbalances using propensity 
scores in the regression analyses. However, it is 
hard to completely remove residual confounding due 
to unmeasurable confounding factors. Fourth, although 
the study results are based on nationwide data 
in Japan, it may be difficult to directly apply these 
results to other regions because of the regional variations 
in pathogens and patterns of drug resistance. 
Nevertheless, we consider the findings of this study to 
be applicable to many countries because community 
prevalence of ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae has 
been reported to be approximately 5%–10% in many 
countries and regions (38), which is comparable to the 
percentages reported from Japan (42). Fifth, although 
the database recorded the accurate date when the 
antibiotics were used, it did not include the detailed 
time of administration of the antibiotics. Thus, we did 
not interpret the study findings from the viewpoint 
of pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Sixth, 
we could not speculate on the reason for the switch 
of antibiotics from the viewpoints of cultures and susceptibility 
because the database does not contain such 
data. Finally, although several clinically important 
antimicrobial resistance pathogens, such as MRSA, 
were diagnosable according to the ICD-10, detailed 
information on other pathogens and drug resistance 

was not recorded. Although the sensitivity and specificity 
of ICD-10 codes for C. difficile infection have 
been reported so far, there are no sufficient data on the 
sensitivity and specificity of ICD-10 codes to detect 
infection by MRSA and multidrug-resistant pathogens. 
Furthermore, as our definition of multidrugresistant 
pathogens was also based on the ICD-10 
coding, the inability to evaluate the exact prevalence 
of multidrug-resistant pathogens based on antimicrobial 
susceptibility was a major limitation that potentially 
affected the generalizability of the study 
findings. Namely, the effect of carbapenem therapies 
as initial therapy for sepsis would vary according to 
the prevalence of multidrug-resistant pathogens in 
the regions. However, because the present study was 
conducted using a nationwide multicenter cohort, 
the prevalence of multidrug-resistant pathogens was 
assumed to approximate that reported in previous national 
surveillance (51). Therefore, the study findings 
could be generalizable to many other nations where 
a prevalence of multidrug-resistant pathogens similar 
to that of Japan has been reported. 

Conclusions 

Compared with the noncarbapenem broad-spectrum 
antibiotics, carbapenems as initial empiric therapy 
were not associated with significantly lower mortality 
overall in patients with sepsis. Scientific evidence on 
the benefits of carbapenem therapy as initial therapy 
in sepsis is still limited, and further prospective studies 
need to be performed.