INTRODUCTION 
Encouraging healthy behavior is one of the major challenges of modern medicine (1). Notably, sitting for prolonged periods of time negatively affects the health of people who are able to stand. It can increase the risk of diabetes and cardiovascular diseases (2–5), the risk of chronic diseases (6), and premature mortality even in individuals meeting physical activity guidelines (7–9). Conversely, interrupting prolonged sitting by standing has been shown to reduce these risks (10–14). Note that even short sprints of exercise have been shown to be of great health value (15, 16). Consequently, how to encourage people to stand is a crucial behavioral question. Here is where the concept of nudges enters the equation. Nudges are interventions that aim to guide people to make good choices for themselves or society. Following the seminal work of (17) on behavioral economics, a nudge is “any aspect of choice architecture that alters behavior in a predictable way, without forbidding options or substantially changing economic incentives. To count as a mere nudge, the intervention must be easily avoidable.” Nudges have been successfully applied in public health policies (18, 19). Some notable examples include opting-in individuals into organ donation by default instead of opting them out by default (it increases the proportion of organ donors) (20), reducing the default amount of opioid prescription in doctors’ medical software (it decreases the quantity of prescribed opioids) (21), or reminding patients about annual checkups (22) and vaccine availability (it increases vaccination rates) (23–26). Rigorous evaluation of the impact of these nudges is crucial to develop effective policies, as some nudges are not always successful in shifting human behaviors (27–29), including some that are implemented at a large scale (30). Studies of nudges for public health policies face two main challenges (18). The first is to design a successful, scalable, and cost-effective nudge. The second one is to thoroughly evaluate the effects of the nudge in the general population (not just in a small sample laboratory setting) and even in the long term (the nudge may lose its effectiveness over time). Related to our work and as examples of these challenges, two recent nudge designs encouraging people to stand are promising. However, their long-term and large-scale effects on the general population remain understudied. The first study (31) showed that the standing rates among employees of a governmental organization increased when their height-adjustable desks were reset to their standing position every morning for 2 weeks. It then decreased by half 2 months after the desks stopped being reset. Another study (32) found that a large amount of its 4000 participants who were asked to stand after learning about the risks of prolonged sitting in a one-time survey self-reported that they had stood. In this work, we study the Apple Watch’s stand reminder (Fig. 1), an example of a nudge targeted to change human behavior. The stand reminder is a notification delivered on the Apple Watch to encourage the user to stand after a long period of inactivity. As described in the Apple Watch’s settings, the user will “receive a reminder to stand if [they]’ve been sitting for the first 50 min of an hour.” The notification remains on the watch screen until the end of the hour (10 min later), after which it disappears. The Watch automatically detects when the user is standing. If the user successfully stands up for 1 min before the hour’s end, the notification becomes a congratulatory message. The stand reminder prompts people to stand without constraints and can be easily ignored; it qualifies as a nudge. This nudge is scalable and cost-effective because it can be deployed with a simple software update. With the increasing popularity of wearable devices [more than one billion connected wearable devices in 2022 (33)], this type of nudge presents an opportunity to study the large-scale causal effects of such behavioral interventions in the general population and offers a promising avenue to improve the health of wearable users. To evaluate the impact of the Apple Watch’s standing nudge at a large scale, we exploit the Apple Heart and Movement Study (AHMS) (34). This study, conducted in collaboration with the American Heart Association and Brigham and Women’s Hospital, investigates the relationship between physical activity, mobility, and heart health. In particular, the AHMS receives the automatically detected standing status of its anonymous, private, and voluntary participants daily. The data are collected in the general population in an uncontrolled setting during which the participants continue their regular activities and can receive the stand reminder nudge. The data used in this work contain over 76 billion minutes of observational standing data from more than 160,000 participants enrolled from 2019 to 2022. As a comparison, the meta-review (35) reports that the nudge interventions in academic journals studies have a median treatment arm sample size of 484 participants, and the interventions in the governmental Nudge Units studies (UK’s Behavioural Insights Team, US’s Office of Evaluation Sciences) have a median treatment arm sample size of 10,006 participants. Moreover, the longest duration of all the meta-reviewed studies reported was 240 days (less than a year), whereas more than 60% of the AHMS participants have at least 240 days of data, with some participants being enrolled for 930 days (about 31 months); we report data on subjects for 21 consecutive months. To recap, these data are not only obtained from real-world scenarios (outside of the lab) but are also substantially larger in all dimensions, sometimes even by several orders of magnitude. In the AHMS data, each day is divided into 288 intervals of 5 min, for example [11:45 (a.m.) to 11:49 (a.m.)]. For each interval and each user, a binary variable indicates whether the user was standing during the time interval (remember that standing is automatically detected, so there is no user friction or bias in reporting). As an illustration, Fig. 2 shows the standing statuses for the time intervals of a weekday from the Health app of one of the authors. We pool the data of 166,034 participants enrolled in the AHMS between 14 November 2019 and 31 May 2022. Across all participants, 53,410,838 days of standing statuses have been accumulated. This represents a total of 76,911,606,720 min and of 15,382,321,344 intervals that are individually labeled standing or not standing; this is six to seven orders of magnitude larger than previous studies on standing nudges [183 participants during work hours for 5 weeks (31) or 4500 participants for a one-time survey (32)]. The nudge is enabled (by default) on all Apple Watches; therefore, we stress that this is an observational study, not a randomized control trial. (It is possible to deactivate the nudge, which we will discuss later.) Hence, it requires specialized mathematical tools to determine its causal effects. We exploit and extend the classical econometrics tool of regression discontinuity (36–39). The regression discontinuity method is used to determine the causal effect of an intervention when randomization is not available. Suppose it is possible to identify a variable and a threshold above or below which the value of the variable triggers or not the intervention, then the average treatment effect can be estimated by comparing observations where the variable lies closely on either side of the threshold. In our case, the nudge is triggered when two conditions are satisfied: (i) the time must be 50 min of an hour, and (ii) the user must have been idling for at least 50 min. For instance, at 11:45 (a.m.), no participant is ever nudged. At 11:50 (a.m.), a participant sitting for precisely 50 min during that hour will be nudged, while another participant sitting for exactly 49 min will not be nudged. This provides the “50 min of prolonged sitting” as a natural threshold for studying the causal effects of the standing behavioral health nudge via regression discontinuity. We extend the standard regression discontinuity method to our time series setting, in which the nudge is a time-varying intervention that can happen multiple times a day (see Materials and Methods). The regression discontinuity design can be intuitively understood by drawing a layperson’s analogy with randomized trials. It allows for the creation and comparison of two groups; the treated group consists of participants who sat for exactly or slightly more than 50 min (they were nudged), while the control group comprises participants who sat for exactly or slightly less than 49 min (they were not nudged). The fundamental underlying regression discontinuity insight is that these groups share a sufficient similarity due to the time proximity so that the precise group assignment can be considered randomized. Figure 3 shows an example of real data on how the regression discontinuity compares participants before and after the discontinuity. In this work, we then study using this observational data whether people are more likely to stand when a nudge is delivered to their Apple Watch after sitting for 50 min compared to when no nudge is delivered (causal effect of the nudge). We find that when nudged, people are more likely to interrupt their prolonged sitting by 43.9% [99% confidence interval (CI) (43.1%, 44.7%)] compared to when not nudged (between 6:00 and 11:59; similar high impact for other periods of the day). After being nudged for 21 months, users are still affected by the nudge, with a causal effect as high as 74% of the causal effect measured in their first month. We also find a strong correlation between the effectiveness of the nudge with age and with activity, with specific segments of the population having an even larger response to the nudge. To further support the causal effects discovered here, we validate some of the results using synthetic controls (40), another powerful tool from econometrics. This not only helps to confirm that the standing nudge has a causal effect but also provides information beyond the discontinuity, showing, for example, that the nudge has an impact even when the user skipped the previous ones and has been sitting for extended periods. We contribute to the literature on the causal effects of behavioral interventions by showing that (i) the regression discontinuity method can be extended and used on time series data with time-varying nudges; (ii) when a nudge is actively delivered to their Apple Watch, people are aware of the intervention, and they are more likely to interrupt their prolonged sitting by a significant margin; (iii) this effect, which is substantial when compared to other behavioral nudges, is even higher for specific segments of the population; (iv) this effect slightly decreases over time but remains high even after 21 months; and (5) using wearables for large-scale observational studies in natural settings opens the door to study the effects of behavioral interventions such as nudges, helping to design and adapt them to different segments of the population. 
RESULTS 
The standing rate discontinuity 
A large amount of observational data is needed for the regression discontinuity method to be successful since the data are then subdivided to include only observations around the discontinuity threshold. We find that the AHMS data are uniquely large enough to apply such a method. Notably, for each time of day and each duration of prolonged sitting, it is possible to select at least one million pairs of users and days for which the user was sitting for exactly this duration chosen on that day when reaching the target time. As an example, there are 1,085,326 pairs of users and days for which the users were on these days in prolonged sitting for precisely 45 min at 11:20 (a.m.) [so standing last at 10:35 (a.m.) and sitting since]. Among them, 141,444 interrupted their prolonged sitting of 45 min by standing at 11:20 (a.m.). Figure 4 shows the standing rates at different times of day, each time computed for users on days and at times when they were sitting for precisely 45 min (top) or 50 min (bottom). In Fig. 4A, none of the users received a nudge because they only sat for 45 min. We observe that the standing rate naturally peaks at the round hours, around which daily life is usually organized (end of a meeting, end of work). Overall, we have a continuous rate graph. In Fig. 4B, the standing rates are computed for users on days and times when they were in prolonged sitting for precisely 50 min. Therefore, standing rates at each hour past 50 min (and only at these times) are from users who were nudged to stand. Compared to the standing rate profile in Fig. 4A, the standing rate profile in Fig. 4B is similar, but it spikes, has a discontinuity, at each hour past 50 min, corresponding precisely to when the nudge is triggered. The nudged subjects have a higher standing rate than non-nudged subjects when all subjects are in a similar prolonged sitting duration of around 50 min. This is a visualization of the nudge causal effect, the jump’s value giving a quantitative measure of it; see Materials and Methods. 
Causal effect of the standing nudge 
The nudge can be delivered during each hour of the day past 50 min. We find that in the morning (between 6:00 and 11:59), the standing nudge delivered to the Apple Watch’s users who have been idling for 50 min increases the users’ standing rate in the following 5 min by 4.76 percentage points [P < 0.001, 99% CI (4.7%, 4.81%)]. It corresponds to a relative increase of the standing rate by 43.9% [99% CI (43.1%, 44.7%)]. Hence, in the morning, people are 43.9% more likely to stand when a nudge is delivered to their Apple Watch after sitting for 50 min compared to when no nudge is delivered. In the afternoon (between 12:00 and 17:59), the relative increase is 35.0% [99% CI (34.4%, 35.5%)], and in the evening (between 18:00 and 23:59), it is 15.5% [99% CI (15.0%, 16.1%)]—see Table 1. We further estimate the effects of the nudge for each hour of the day by using the large amount of data available. In Fig. 5, we report the nudge causal effects with 99% CIs as shaded bands. Compared to not delivering a nudge, the relative increase in standing rate in the 5 min following the nudge delivery is over 35% for every hour from 6:00 to 16:00. 
Delayed causal effect of the standing nudge 
A nudge can only be delivered at 50 min past the hour. Unless the user intervenes, the nudge stays onscreen until the end of the hour, 10 min later. In the morning (between 6:00 and 11:59), we find that for users who received the nudge and did not stand in the first 5 min following its delivery, the standing rate in the last 5 min of the hour is still increased by 2.21 percentage points [P < 0.001, 99% CI (2.15%, 2.27%)]. It is a relative increase in the standing rate of 20.0% [99% CI (19.4%, 20.7%)]. In Fig. 5, we show, with the orange dashed line, the causal effect of the nudge in the last 5 min of each hour of the day.
Placebo effect without standing nudge 
The standing nudge has a unique design feature where it is triggered not only after 50 min of prolonged sitting (enabling regression discontinuity) but also only at 50 (or 55) min past an hour. Therefore, no nudge can be triggered between 0 and 49 min past an hour, even when 50 min of prolonged sitting are reached (recall the seating/standing is automatically detected). We can therefore perform a placebo analysis by applying our regression discontinuity methodology to this data when no nudge can be triggered. We expect to find virtually no causal effect. We find relative effects of +1.4% [99% CI (1.2%, 1.6%)] in the morning, +2.1% [99% CI (1.9%, 2.2%)] in the afternoon, and +1.9% [99% CI (1.8%, 2.1%)] in the evening for a hypothetical nudge between 0 and 49 min past an hour. These placebo effects are close to 0 compared to the +43.9%, +35.0%, and +15.5% for the nonplacebo (nudge) effects, respectively. 
Controlling for age 
The AHMS contains private and anonymous information about the participants’ demographics, which can be used to measure the impact of the nudge on different subpopulations. When the users choose to enroll in the study, they submit their age and their biological sex. Age is mandatory to determine eligibility, while biological sex is optional. We form different age groups using the users’ reported age and estimate the causal effect of the nudge on each group separately. In Fig. 6 and Table 1, we report the relative causal effect of the nudge at each hour of the day for seven age groups between 18 and 84 years old. We find that the causal effect of the nudge is higher for groups of older individuals. For instance, in the morning, the nudge increases the standing rate for participants between 75 and 64 years old by 61.7% [99% CI (54.9%, 68.4%)]; meanwhile, it increases the standing rate for participants between 25 and 34 years old by 40.9% [99% CI (39.2%, 42.6%)]. 
Controlling for self-reported sex 
Figure 6 and Table 1 also show the nudge effectiveness for participants who self-reported as male (n = 105,705), female (n = 57,731), or other (n = 2598). The nudge seems to have a similar causal effect on the individuals who self-reported as female or male. The group "Other" exhibits large CIs because it contains fewer individuals. 
Moderating by the day of the week 
In addition to controlling for user characteristics, we also control by day of the week. Figure 6 reveals two distinct profiles of causal effects: one for weekdays (Monday to Friday) and one for weekend days (Saturday to Sunday). The reported relative causal effects in Table 1 quantify that the nudge is more effective in the morning during the weekdays, while it is more effective in the afternoon and the evening on the weekend. For instance, the nudge induces a relative increase in the evening of 18.6% [99% CI (17.5%, 19.7%)] during the weekend against a relative increase in the evening of 14.3% [99% CI (13.6%, 14.9%)] during the weekdays. 
Moderating by the Apple Watch’s activity rings 
Using the Apple Watch, users can track how often they stand, how much they move, and how many minutes they exercise. Progress toward these three objectives is summarized by three activity rings, shown in Fig. 1: the blue stand ring, the red move ring, and the green exercise ring. Every day, users can “close” each ring after reaching a predetermined daily goal for that ring. The AHMS contains daily completion progress for all users’ activity rings, which indicates how involved each user is with their fitness goals and Apple Watch rings. We leverage this information to understand better how behavioral differences emerge between users with different levels of engagement with their daily activities. For each ring, we partition users by how often they have closed the ring, measured in the proportion of days closed over the study period. Some users may have closed their exercise ring every day, while others may have closed it only for 40% of the days. The nudge substantially affects active users who close at least one of the rings daily—see Table 1 and Fig. 6. In the morning, the nudge increases the standing rate for users who always close their move ring by 188.6%, for users who always close their exercise ring by 217.3%, and for users who always close their stand ring by 218.7%—see Table 1 for 99% CIs. In absolute causal effect, this represents an increase in standing rate of 21.71 percentage points for the move ring, 24.99 percentage points for the exercise ring, and 25.44 percentage points for the stand ring—see table S1. A strong effect is also present in users who close their move and exercise rings 80 to 99% of the days (around 5 or 6 days a week), with a relative increase of at least 84.6% in the morning. For users who close their rings less than 50% of the days, the effects are smaller but still present: 20.0% relative increase for the move ring, 23.9% relative increase for the exercise ring, and 14.7% relative increase for the stand ring. 
Detecting long-term causal effect of the nudge 
To study the effectiveness of the nudge over time, we select all subjects with at least 365 days of data spread over at least 22 months. We obtain 23,229 users with a total of 14,373,885 days of data. Because users can join the study at different times, we compute, for each day of data, the number of months that have elapsed since the user entered the study. We then partition the data into 22 groups, one for each month. We compute the nudge causal effect in each of these groups and obtain the evolution of the nudge effect over 22 months. In Fig. 7, we report the evolution of the morning, afternoon, and evening causal effects (see also Table 1). For these 23,229 users who stayed at least 22 months in the study and had at least 365 days of data, we find that the nudge increases the standing rate by about 75% during the first 6 months. The increase in standing rate then slightly declines from 75 to 57% over the next 9 months and eventually stays constant at around 57% for the last 6 months. The final causal effect value (57% increase) represents 76% of the original value (which was a 75% increase). So the nudge retains 76% of its original effect after 21 months. 
DISCUSSION 
Our results showed that a simple notification (“Time to stand! Stand up and move a little for one minute”) encourages Apple Watch users to stand and interrupt their prolonged sitting. We demonstrated the strength of the nudge causal effect on a very large and diverse population over a long time horizon, which contrasts and improves on previous studies, which were often limited to small population sizes as well as to limited time horizons. We also correlated the effectiveness of the nudge for different segments of the population. We achieved this by using observational data and extending the classical econometric tools of regression discontinuity for the analysis. We note that the average causal effects of the nudge are of the same magnitude as other nudges reported in the literature (35) (an absolute increase of 4.76 percentage points). The effect magnitude is much higher for some specific segments of the population. The study found that the nudge substantially affects the standing rates of Apple Watch users, especially during the morning and afternoon. These times of day correspond to work hours, which are moments of prolonged sitting for some job sectors during which users might “forget” to stand. We hypothesize that the nudge is more effective at reminding busy users to stand instead of convincing reluctant users to do so. This echoes the findings of (32) on standing nudges, stating the complexity of the message delivered by the nudge, and notably how much it informs the user about the risk of prolonged sitting, does not affect standing rates. Inspecting the regression coefficients in all the regression experiments show that the weight a (which multiplies the duration of prolonged sitting to yield the standing rate, see Materials and Methods) is negative. Hence, the longer people sit, the more likely they are to remain seated. The nudge can break these prolonged sitting periods. Since the nudge stays on for 10 min or until the user stands, we demonstrated that a small delay still influences human behavior. Notably, the nudge still increases the standing rate 5 min after the delivery. Further studies should consider longer delays or possible snoozing mechanisms. To assess the robustness of our findings, we conducted placebo analyses on the standing data between 0 and 49 min past any hour when no nudge is ever triggered, measuring hypothetical causal effects in the absence of the nudge intervention. These placebo effects were close to zero (e.g., +1.4% without the nudge versus +43.9% with the nudge in the morning), reinforcing the strength of our findings. However, we note that these placebo effects were strictly greater than zero, indicating potential limitations of the linear model used by the regression discontinuity approach in capturing the standing rate (as evident in Fig. 3, where the linear model serves as an excellent but not perfect approximation). This nonparametric placebo test enhances the significance of the observed causal effects while hinting at possible limitations of the linear model specification. We further complement our quantitative findings with logistic regression discontinuity and with synthetic controls (the Supplementary Materials), which consistently support the strong causal effects of the nudge as detected with linear regression discontinuity. We also demonstrated that nudging is even more effective for older population segments; there is a strong correlation between the effectiveness of the nudge and age. This can enlighten designers on how to deliver different behavioral health interventions to distinct age groups. It remains to be studied why the older age group is more compliant; reasons can vary from increased health awareness to being naturally more sedentary with fewer work-related constraints. Self-identified female and male participants showed similar response rates to the nudge. Both sexes were highly responsive. Similarly, it is essential to notice that while the actual day-of-week specific profiles are different, the nudge was found effective for workdays and weekends. The weekday profiles were almost identical, whereas the weekend profiles stood out with a more substantial nudge effect in the afternoon and evening. This might suggest that users are active at later times during the weekend and are more likely to comply with the nudge. We further examined the correlation with other activities recorded by the Apple Watch. We found that users respond better to the standing nudge if they close their activity rings regularly. This is not unexpected as the activity rings also are a form of nudge design. Thus, people who are encouraged by the ring design to be active daily may also be encouraged by the nudge. However, it is exciting to see that the nudge still affects even users who do not close their rings daily. This can, once again, inform behavioral intervention designers about population segmentation critical for tailoring such designs. It shows that some people might not be engaged with one nudge design (the activity rings) but can still be responsive to simpler nudges (the notification). Next, we investigated the long-term effects of the nudge by evaluating its causal effect over 22 months for users who stayed in the study that long. Nudge effects were higher during the early months of the study; they then slightly declined for several months before stabilizing at around 76 percent of their original value for the last 6 months. The nudge continues to be effective even after such prolonged daily exposure. In addition, one can notice that the causal effect of the nudge is overall higher for the long-term users than for the total population used in this study. We hypothesize that selecting users with data spanning at least 22 months can lead to selection bias of users more comfortable with wearables and more likely to respond to health interventions. Nevertheless, this does not invalidate our study’s behavioral insights; the nudge remains highly efficient for people wearing their Watch for extended periods. For the introduced time-dependent regression discontinuity, which can be applied to similar problems in causal inference for health where the intervention depends on previous outcomes, we considered a linear model (Table 1) as well as a logistic regression (see table S2). To further support the causal effects discovered here, we validated some results using the nonparametric tool of synthetic controls (40) (see the Supplementary Material). This not only confirmed that the standing nudge has a causal effect but also provided information beyond the discontinuity, showing, for example, that the nudge has an impact even when the user ignores the previous one and has been sitting for extended periods. Lessons learned from this study can be immediately applied to the design of other nudges, ranging from the simple intervention design with decisive outcome action to the understanding of how different population segments respond to the intervention. Overall, our results show the power of simple behavioral health interventions, active nudges, and the opportunities provided by observational studies when such interventions are deployed to the general population. This provides promising opportunities for implementing beneficial health strategies. In the context of the nudge we examined, interrupting sedentary time with short bouts of standing is beneficially associated with metabolic risk variables independently of total sedentary time, e.g., (10–14). Compared to experimental data such as A/B testing, observational studies have unique characteristics, including a larger population size, a longer study period, a study population closer to the general population, and lower costs. Wearables provide a unique opportunity for such studies (41). Having said so, no such research comes without its limitations, and we will discuss some next. First, we recall that our study is based on observational data and the regression discontinuity approach, which, while powerful and rigorous, relies on the assumption that the standing rate at a sedentary duration of 50 min can be modeled using the standing rate at a slightly shorter sedentary duration. We have provided evidence to support this assumption through both qualitative visualizations and quantitative analysis, such as the placebo tests. In addition, we have complemented our analysis with Synthetic Controls and different regression models (logistic and linear) that yielded consistent conclusions. However, these causal inference assumptions cannot be unequivocally tested on observational data alone and therefore remain a limitation of our study. Notably, the placebo tests have suggested that, while the causal effects are considerably larger than the placebo effect, their quantitative estimation could be refined with a customized nonlinear model. Because of privacy considerations, the study data do not indicate whether participants effectively received and noticed the nudge. In clinical studies, avoiding the treatment (the nudge here) is referred to as noncompliance. Participants may escape the nudge in several scenarios: when they remove their Watch to charge it when they are in “do not disturb” mode, or when they are asleep. Users can also manually disable the nudge in the Watch’s settings (it is on by default, but users can turn it off). In those scenarios, we considered these users to be treated, whereas they were not. We monitored these users’ reactions, but these users were not nudged. Noncompliance can only cause us to underestimate the nudge’s causal effect. A fuzzy regression discontinuity design (36) could be used to address the compliance problem. According to this method, if there is a fraction f% of people who did not notice the nudge, then the actual causal effect should be increased by approximately f%. Hence the causal effect we uncovered in this study can only be more substantial by accounting for noncompliant users. We also know that it is possible to voluntarily “cheat” the Apple Watch’s standing sensors, although this is not common. The reported effects are so strong that such a minor potential overestimation would not affect the general conclusions on the impact of the nudge. And even if a user voluntarily “cheats” the sensor by performing wide and specific arm movements for a long enough time, we can still conclude that the nudge has affected the user’s behavior. The study is intrinsically biased to demographics that own an Apple Watch and opt into the AHMS; extending this study to other devices and complementing it with controlled randomized trials will further support the findings. In future research, automatically identifying naturally emerging groups of subjects with similar behavior would be of great value. This approach would complement our current analysis, which focused on manually defined demographic groups or activity groups. By exploring the composition, dynamics, and size of these automatically defined groups, possibly including individuals who are consistently unaffected by the nudge, those consistently affected, and those exhibiting diminishing responses over time, we can gain more insights into the effectiveness and nuanced effects of the nudge. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Data 
We used the data from the AHMS (34). This study contains private and anonymized health-related data that its voluntary participants agreed to share. To be eligible, the participants must own an Apple Watch paired with their iPhone, be at least 18 years old (at least 19 years old in Alabama and Nebraska; at least 21 years old in Puerto Rico), live in the United States of America, have installed the Apple Research app on their iPhone, do not share their iCloud account, iPhone, or Apple Watch with anyone else, and are willing and able to provide informed consent to participate in the study. In total, 166,034 participants with at least 1 day of standing data were enrolled between 14 November 2019 and 31 May 2022. Apple’s Institutional Review Board approved the study, and participants consented to participate. 
Standing data 
The Apple Watch automatically detects when a user is standing using its built-in sensors and records it with a resolution of 5 min. Every day is divided into 288 consecutive 5-min intervals, and the Apple Watch records the intervals during which the user was detected to be standing. These data are saved as “Stand Minutes” in the Health app. Since only intervals during which standing was detected are logged, any missing interval was assumed to represent no standing. If a user did not have any Stand Minutes entries for a full day, the day was dropped for this user (instead of labeling all the 288 intervals as “no standing”). The time intervals were expressed in the user’s local time zone. We write Yi,d,t ∈ {0,1} the standing status of user i, on day d, during time interval [5t,5t + 5], where 5t is the time of day in minutes. For each pair of user and day (i, d), the time series (Yi,d,t)0≤t<288 takes 288 values (Yi,d,0, Yi,d,1, …, Yi,d,287), altogether covering the 24*60 = 1,440 = 5*288 min of day d. 
Demographics 
The AHMS data contain the birth date and the self-reported sex participants shared when they enrolled. Our data include 34.8% females, 63.7% males, and 1.5% individuals who preferred not to say. We computed the age of participants as of 31 May 2022. The age distribution of the study participants is reported in fig. S1. 
Activity rings 
For each day and subject, the AHMS data contain the completion status of the three subject’s activity rings. For each day of standing data that a subject has, we fetched the completion status of the three rings on that day. We computed the ring engagement metric as the proportion of study days for which a particular ring was closed. 
Regression discontinuity design 
Standard regression discontinuity design In observational studies where randomization is not available, the regression discontinuity design can be used to estimate the causal effect of a treatment on the outcome of interest Y (36, 38). For the design to be applicable, the binary treatment N must be assigned according to a measured continuous variable Z and a known activation threshold β such that N = 1(z ≥ β). Since Z determines the treatment assignment, it is called the forcing variable (or assignment variable) (38). The discontinuity of the function z ↦ 1(z ≥ β) at z = β allows the estimation of the causal effect τ around z = β by fitting the (linear) model (results on Table 1) Y=b+a⋅Z+τ⋅N+ε (1) where a and b are the regression coefficients, τ is the causal effect, and ε is the random error. The variable τ represents the causal effect at the discontinuity Z = β. Regression discontinuity design for time-varying outcomes We reorganized the standing data from the time series format into a tabular form that can be used for the regression discontinuity. First, we identified the forcing variable determining the treatment assignment and its activation threshold. In our study, the variable forcing the nudge is the duration of prolonged sitting, i.e., the elapsed time since standing was last detected. We write Zi,d,t the number of minutes elapsed at time t since user i was last detected to be standing on the day d. Second, we determined when the nudge was triggered. We write Ni,d,t the binary variable indicating if the nudge was active for user i, at time t, on the day d. For a time interval [5t,5t + 5] corresponding to 50 min past an hour (whenever t = 10 mod 12), the nudge is triggered if and only if the duration of prolonged sitting Zi,d,t is greater or equal to 50 min. We have, Ni,d,t = 1(Zi,d,t ≥ 50). For intervals corresponding to 55 min past an hour (whenever t = 11 mod 12), the threshold duration is 55 min; the user needs to have been idling for the first 50 min of the hour to trigger the nudge at 50 min past the hour and still be idling from 50 to 54 min past the hour for the nudge to still be on at 55 min past the hour. Hence, Ni,d,t = 1(Zi,d,t ≥ 55) for such t. For all other intervals, the nudge is never triggered (the threshold can be set to +∞). Last, we computed the values of Zi,d,t and Ni,d,t from the data (Yi,d,t). We obtained the dataset: 𝒟 = {(Zi,d,t, Yi,d,t, Ni,d,t) ∣ ∀(i, d, t)}. The discontinuity thresholds are βt = 50 for times t corresponding to 50 min past an hour, βt = 55 for times t corresponding to 55 min past an hour, and βt = + ∞ for the other t. Regression discontinuity details Regression in this paper was implemented in Python 3.9.5 with the library statsmodel v.0.13.2 (42). All test statistics are two-sided. The data distribution was assumed to come from a linear model with a Gaussian response in the reported results (this common assumption was not formally tested). As a complementary analysis, we find equivalent results with identical conclusions using a logistic model with a binomial response (see table S2). Because the discontinuity was located at Zi,d,t = 50 or Zi,d,t = 55, we filtered the data around the discontinuity by keeping data points with 30 ≤ Zi,d,t ≤ 70. In addition, we did not include any data points with Zi,d,t = 60 since we found they were not well approximated by the regression discontinuity parametric models. Figure 3 shows an example of the fitted regression discontinuity. Model specification The general model specification is model (1) Yi,d,t=b+a⋅Zi,d,t+τ⋅Ni,d,t+εi,d,t with a standard Gaussian error ɛi,d,t. As detailed above, the binary variable Yi,d,t indicates if user i standing on day d during time [5t,5t + 5]; the variable Zi,d,t is the forcing variable, it is the duration that user i has been in prolonged sitting on day d at time 5t; and the binary variable Ni,d,t indicates if the nudge was delivered to user i on day d at time 5t. The intercept b represents a baseline standing rate for users, and the variable a represents the change in standing rate as Zi,d,t increases. The variable τ is the causal effect. In the experiments, we allowed the coefficients a, b, and τ to be shared, to be specific to groups of users i, to be specific to groups of time t, or to be specific to groups of days d. As a result, they can account for user fixed-effects, time fixed-effects, or day fixed-effects. The logistic model only differs in the response function (the noise model). The model is Yi,d,t∼B[p=σ(b+a⋅Zi,d,t+τ⋅Ni,d,t)] where B(p) is the Bernoulli distribution with mean p, and σ is the logistic function σ(x)=11+e−x. Linear model For the linear model, the absolute causal effect of the nudge at the discontinuity is precisely the variable τ. It is the absolute increase in the standing rate due to the nudge, measured in percentage points. The regression returns an estimated τ^ with SE στ. We reported τ^ with a 99% CI, τ^∓t0.99στ, where t0.99 is such that p(Z ≤ t0.99) = 0.995 for a standard normal Z. We also defined the relative causal effect ρ of the nudge as the increase in the standing rate relative to the standing rate without the nudge at the discontinuity β. That is, ρ^=τ^b^+a^⋅β, where τ^,a^,andb^ are estimated by the regression. To provide a CI for the ratio ρ^, we combined the CIs of τ, a, and b using the delta method (43). We obtained the CI ρ^∓t0.99∣ρ^∣σ2ττ^2+σ2b+β2σ2a(b^+βa^)2−−−−−−−−−−−−−−⎷ Logistic model For the logistic model, τ represents the multiplicative increase in log odds due to the nudge. To obtain an absolute causal effect, we computed the expected response with and without treatment σ(b^+a^β+τ^)−σ(b^+a^β) We also computed the relative causal effect as ρ^=σ(b^+a^β+τ^)σ(b^+a^β)−1 We obtained CIs with the delta method again. Since σ′(z)/σ(z) = 1 − σ(z) for any z, we obtain the CI ρ^∓t0.99∣ρ^+1∣v1+v2−−−−−−√ where v1=(σ2b+σ2aβ2)[σ(b^+a^β+τ^)−σ(b^+a^β)]2 and v2=σ2τ[1−σ(b^+a^β+τ^)]2. Regression detail for each experiment We present the analysis with the linear model. We repeated the same analysis with the logistic model. We first evaluated the effect of the nudge on the standing rate during three periods of the day: the morning, the afternoon, and the evening. We formed three groups: G1 = {82,94, …,142}, G2 = {154,166, …,214}, and G3 = {226,238, …,286}, corresponding to the sets of t representing time intervals from 50 min past an hour to 54 min past an hour between 6:00 (a.m.) and 11:59 (a.m.), between 12:00 (p.m.) and 17:59, and between 18:00 and 23:59, respectively. For each period p ∈ {1,2,3}, we fitted the model Yi,d,t=bp+ap⋅Zi,d,t+τp⋅Ni,d,t+εi,d,t on the data 𝒟p = {(Zi,d,t, Yi,d,t, Ni,d,t) ∣ ∀i, ∀d, ∀t ∈ Gp}. To estimate the causal effect for each hour instead of for each period Gp, as in Fig. 3, we fitted the more granular model Yi,d,t=bt+at⋅Zi,d,t+τt⋅Ni,d,t+εi,d,t on the data 𝒟t = {(Zi,d,t, Yi,d,t, Ni,d,t) ∣ ∀i, ∀d}. To take into account possible subjects’ fixed-effects, such as demographics, we partitioned the subjects into groups {S1, …, Sk} and fitted the model Yi,d,t=bp,k+ap,k⋅Zi,d,t+τp,k⋅Ni,d,t+εi,d,t on the data 𝒟p,k = {(Zi,d,t, Yi,d,t, Ni,d,t) ∣ ∀i ∈ Sk, ∀d, ∀t ∈ Gp}. Similarly, the causal effect can be estimated for each hour and each group of subjects by replacing p with t in the model (see Fig. 6). Examples of partitions are as follows: 1) By age: We formed groups 18 to 24 years old, 25 to 34, 35 to 44, 45 to 54, 55 to 64, 65 to 74, and 75 to 84 (using the participant’s age as of 31 May 2022); 2) By self-reported sex: We formed groups female, male, and other; 3) By engagement with an activity ring: We partitioned users by how often they close this activity ring: 0 to 49% of the days, 50 to 79% of the days, 80 to 99% of the days, 100% of the days. To account for fixed-effects due to the day of the week, we partitioned the days d into seven groups D1 to D7, one for each day of the week. We then fitted the model Yi,d,t=bp,f+ap,f⋅Zi,d,t+τp,f⋅Ni,d,t+εi,d,t on the data 𝒟p,f = {(Zi,d,t, Yi,d,t, Ni,d,t) ∣ ∀i, ∀d ∈ Df, ∀t ∈ Gp}. Last, to evaluate long-term effects, we selected all subjects i with at least 365 days of standing data spanning at least 22 months. If we define Fi as the first day of data for subject i and Li as the last day of data, then we require that Li − Fi ≥ 22 months. We then partitioned the observations (i, d, t) depending on when they happened, relative to the first day in the study of subject i. For each month m ∈ {0, …,21}, we defined Km={(i,d)∣∀(i,d),Fi+mmonths≤d<Fi+(m+1)months} We then fitted the model Yi,d,t=bp,m+ap,m⋅Zi,d,t+τp,m⋅Ni,d,t+εi,d,t on the data 𝒟p,m = {(Zi,d,t, Yi,d,t, Ni,d,t) ∣ ∀(i, d) ∈ Km, ∀t ∈ Gp}. 
  
