Introduction
Dupilumab is a human monoclonal antibody that targets the interleukin (IL)-4 receptor subunit-α (IL-4Rα), thereby blocking the signaling of IL-4 and IL-13, and consequently inhibiting the entire T2-pathway.1 Overall, the effectiveness and safety of dupilumab have been demonstrated for the treatment of patients with atopic dermatitis (AD).2,3 However, not all patients with AD respond equally to dupilumab treatment, and some patients develop adverse effects. This heterogeneity may be partly explained by differences in the bioavailability of dupilumab at the target tissue, which in turn is influenced by adherence, drug dose, and pharmacokinetic (PK) covariates.4 With other diseases (eg, inflammatory bowel disease, psoriasis), a correlation between serum TNFα-inhibitor levels and treatment response has been described.5,6 To our knowledge, no data are available on whether measuring serum dupilumab levels can help to optimize AD treatment. Therefore, this study evaluated the association of serum dupilumab levels at 16 weeks of treatment with treatment response and adverse effects in patients with AD.

Methods
This prospective clinical cohort study consecutively included adult patients with AD who started dupilumab and in whom a serum sample was available at 16 weeks of treatment. All patients participated in the BioDay Registry.3 At baseline, patients received a loading dose of dupilumab 600 mg subcutaneously, followed by 300 mg every other week. Patients who had a dose adjustment or discontinued treatment before 16 weeks of treatment were excluded.

The BioDay Registry was considered noninterventional by the local medical ethics committee (METC 18/239) and was performed according to the Helsinki Declaration. All included patients provided written informed consent.

Outcome Measures
Disease severity was assessed and scored at baseline and at weeks 16 and 52 using the Eczema Area and Severity Index (EASI). Treatment response was defined as the percentage of reduction in EASI score compared with the baseline score (eg, EASI 90 indicates a 90% reduction vs the baseline score) and as an absolute EASI cutoff score of 7 or lower, which indicates controlled AD.7 Serum dupilumab levels were measured at 16 weeks of treatment using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay as previously described.8 Furthermore, adverse effects during the first year of dupilumab treatment were recorded, with a special focus on dupilumab-associated ocular surface disease (DAOSD).

Statistical Analysis
The AD outcome measures were calculated at 16 and 52 weeks of dupilumab treatment. Box plots were used to visually compare drug levels by responder status at week 16. A multivariate logistic regression model was used to explore the role of serum dupilumab levels at 16 weeks in predicting response (EASI ≥90; EASI ≤7) at 52 weeks and to explore the association of serum dupilumab levels and the development of adverse effects, with a special focus on DAOSD, adjusted for age and sex. Missing data were imputed with a fully conditional specification. The analysis was performed on each imputed data set and the results were subsequently pooled. In an additional step, we added restrictive cubic splines to the model for serum dupilumab levels. Any significant nonlinear effect that we observed was most likely because of a small number of patients with high serum dupilumab levels, and therefore, splines were not included in the model. Statistical tests were 2-tailed and P values < .05. All data were analyzed from January to June 2022 using IBM SPSS Statistics, version 26.0.0.1 (International Business Machines) and SAS, version 9.4 (SAS Institute).

Results
Patient and Baseline Characteristics
The cohort of 295 patients with AD (mean [SD] age, 41.5 [15.9] years; 170 [57.6%] men) had a median (IQR) EASI baseline score of 14.1 (10.0-20.2; Table 1). Two patients were retrospectively excluded owing to nonadherence (serum dupilumab level, 0.0 μg/mL).

Dupilumab Level and Treatment Response
At 16 weeks of treatment, the median (IQR [range]) dupilumab level in the total cohort was 86.6 μg/mL (64.6-110.0 [10.1-382.0] μg/mL; Figure). Furthermore, no significant differences were found in median serum dupilumab levels between responder statuses (EASI, <50, 50, 75, or 90) at week 16 (P = .18; Figure) or in the distribution of responders statuses between serum dupilumab levels quartiles (P = .06; supporting data illustrated in the Figure).

At time of data lock, 248 of 295 (84.1%) patients had reached the 52-week time point. Patients who discontinued treatment after 16 weeks owing to ineffectiveness (n = 6) had median (IQR) serum dupilumab levels of 91.2 μg/mL (59.3-144.0). Multivariate logistic regression analysis showed nonsignificant odds ratios (ORs) for serum dupilumab levels at week 16 and predicting response at 52 weeks of treatment (EASI ≥90: OR, 0.96 [95% CI, 0.90-1.04; P = .34] and EASI ≤7: OR, 1.03 [95% CI, 0.93-1.14; P = .55]).

Dupilumab Level and Adverse Effects
Adverse effects during the first year of dupilumab treatment were reported by 216 (73.2%) patients, of whom 137 (46.4%) developed DAOSD. Similarly, multivariate logistic regression analysis showed nonsignificant ORs for serum dupilumab levels at 16 weeks for the prediction of adverse effects (OR, 1.01; 95% CI, 0.95-1.07; P = .83), and specifically, DAOSD (OR, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.97-1.08; P = .46) during the first year of treatment (Table 2).

Discussion
This study measured serum dupilumab levels in a large population of patients with AD treated in daily clinical practice. A broad range of serum dupilumab levels at week 16 was found in the total cohort, and these levels were substantially higher compared with serum levels of monoclonal antibodies used in other diseases, such as inflammatory bowel disease and psoriasis.5,9 High dosing, resulting in high drug levels, might be explained by the saturable target-mediated clearance pathway of dupilumab. Li and colleagues10 described the PK profile for dupilumab through 6 phase 1 studies and concluded that when the concentration was high enough to saturate the IL-4Rα, the PK of dupilumab followed a linear−dose-proportional PK profile. In AD, maximum efficacy was observed at doses that yielded dose-proportional PK profiles, which was established by high serum levels, and thus achieved saturation of the IL-4Rα.4

Interestingly, the present study suggests that observed serum dupilumab levels were not related to treatment response. This is in contrast to certain monoclonal antibodies used in other diseases (ie, TNF-inhibitor in other autoimmune diseases).6,11,12,13 It may be that response is dependent on target availability of the IL-4Rα, with an interpatient variability producing heterogeneity in response. However, because serum dupilumab levels are relatively high, the IL-4Rα in all patients was likely fully saturated at week 16. This hypothesis is supported by our previous data showing full saturation of the IL-4Rα on circulating B- and T-cells at week 16.14 This would explain why serum dupilumab levels were not related to effectiveness, although we cannot rule out differential effects in the tissue associated with heterogeneity in serum dupilumab levels. Additionally, the findings of the present study showed that serum dupilumab levels at 16 weeks were not associated with adverse effects, specifically not with DAOSD. However, a previous study showed that prolonging the dupilumab interval, thereby lowering serum dupilumab levels, was associated with improvement in DAOSD.15 Maybe the development of DAOSD is more associated with differences in IL-4Rα expression among patients. More research is necessary to confirm the hypothesis of interpatient variability of the IL-4Rα and the PKs of dupilumab.

Limitations
A limitation of the study was that the serum dupilumab measurements were performed independent of dupilumab administration. This may have affected the range of serum dupilumab levels and may have affected the prediction model.

Conclusions
In this prospective clinical cohort study in patients with AD, a broad range of serum dupilumab levels was found at 16 weeks of treatment. No association with treatment response or adverse effects to dupilumab were identified in patients with AD during the first year of dupilumab treatment.