Introduction
The management of hypertonia and/or upper limb muscle contractures in patients with stroke is quite challenging (Baguley et al. 2011). Spasticity of the elbow flexor muscles is frequent (Kong & Chua, 1999; van Kuijk et al. 2002). It reduces elbow extension and thus the functional capacity of the upper limb (Keenan, 1988; van Kuijk et al. 2002). This can impact on the patient's quality of life (Bhakta et al. 1996) and may also be painful (Bhakta et al. 1996; Kong & Chua, 1999; van Kuijk et al. 2002). Balance capacity can be reduced, particularly during gait (Kong & Chua, 1999), as walking and fatigue tend to increase hypertonia. Patients also very frequently complain that involuntary elbow flexion during gait or activities is not aesthetic (Esquenazi et al. 2012).

Botulinum Toxin (BoNT) A has been used to treat muscle spasticity in several countries since the 1990s. Surprisingly, more than 20 years later, there are still no robust guidelines regarding injection parameters (i.e. dilution, identification of the muscles to treat, number of injection points, depth of injection, etc.; Kwakkel & Meskers, 2015). The injection parameters used in clinical practice are therefore heterogeneous (Baguley et al. 2011) and evaluations are not standardized. This may be one of the reasons why studies fail to show that BoNT increases range of motion, functional capacity or amount of limb use (Turner-Stokes et al. 2013b; Kwakkel & Meskers, 2015), particularly in the upper limb. Determining the appropriate muscles to inject is not simple (Baguley et al. 2011; Kwakkel & Meskers, 2015), and many different muscles are injected to treat similar spasticity patterns, with varying results. A study using EMG and electrogoniometers showed that troublesome spasticity and contractures occur essentially in the three main elbow flexors: brachioradialis, biceps brachii and brachialis (Keenan, 1988), but the accessory elbow flexors could also be involved. The muscles targeted to reduce involuntary elbow flexion are often chosen based on how superficial, and therefore how easy to inject, they are. Thus the biceps brachii (Bhakta et al. 1996; Hesse et al. 1998; Bakheit et al. 2000, 2001, 2004; Lagalla et al. 2000; Wang et al. 2002; Chen et al. 2005; Slawek et al. 2005; Suputtitada & Suwanwela, 2005; Caty et al. 2009; Lai et al. 2009; McCrory et al. 2009; Bensmail et al. 2010a,b; Sun et al. 2010; Baguley et al. 2011; Demetrios et al. 2014), brachioradialis (Bhakta et al. 1996; Wang et al. 2002; Slawek et al. 2005; Lai et al. 2009; McCrory et al. 2009; Bensmail et al. 2010a,b; Baguley et al. 2011; Demetrios et al. 2014) and accessory flexor muscles such as flexor digitorum superficialis and pronator teres (Bhakta et al. 1996; Hesse et al. 1998; Bakheit et al. 2000, 2001, 2004; Lagalla et al. 2000; Wang et al. 2002; Slawek et al. 2005; Suputtitada & Suwanwela, 2005; Caty et al. 2009; McCrory et al. 2009; Bensmail et al. 2010a,b; Sun et al. 2010; Baguley et al. 2011; Demetrios et al. 2014) are often injected, whereas the brachialis, which is deeper, is less frequently injected (Hesse et al. 1998; Lagalla et al. 2000; Caty et al. 2009; McCrory et al. 2009; Bensmail et al. 2010a,b; Baguley et al. 2011; Demetrios et al. 2014).

To provide an appropriate treatment for a spasticity pattern, a comprehensive assessment is necessary to determine the muscles involved. A useful adjunct to the usual clinical assessment is selective motor nerve block (SMNB; Elovic et al. 2009). SMNBs are easy to perform, innocuous and the effect only lasts a few hours. The method involves local anaesthesia of a nerve, preventing its conduction and causing an immediate decrease in spasticity and voluntary muscle activation. It is then possible to evaluate passive range of motion and to differentiate between spasticity and contracture, as well as to evaluate the strength of antagonist muscles. Changes in posture and movement can be evaluated and the involvement of the temporarily inhibited muscle determined. Selective block of the nerves that innervate the three main elbow flexors (brachialis, biceps brachii and brachioradialis) has already been described. The brachioradialis muscle can be inhibited by blocking the radialis nerve and the brachialis and the biceps brachii muscles can be inhibited by blocking the musculocutaneous nerve (Yang et al. 1995; Kong & Chua, 1999). However, blocking the musculocutaneous nerve simultaneously inhibits the biceps brachii and the brachialis muscles, thus it is not possible to differentiate them.

We developed a method involving the successive inhibition of each elbow flexor in order to determine the contribution of each to the abnormal movement. The method is based on three successive SMNB and involves a process of deduction to determine the role of each muscle:
Block of the brachialis branch of the musculocutaneous nerve– contribution of the brachialis is determined.
Block of the radial nerve – contribution of the brachioradialis is determined.
Block of the musculocutaneous nerve – contribution of the biceps is determined.
The intrinsic characteristics (viscosity and elasticity) of the accessory flexors are then determined, as they are the only elbow flexors that remain active following the three blocks.
The aim of this study was to develop and test this systematic approach, using the example of the arm flexion pattern. We hypothesized, based on our clinical experience, that the contribution of the brachialis muscle to the loss of elbow extension would be greater than the contributions of the brachioradialis and biceps brachii. We first carried out a cadaver study to determine appropriate anatomical landmarks for the brachialis nerve block. SMNBs of the elbow flexors were then carried out in patients with stroke-related spasticity to determine the respective contributions of each elbow flexor to the arm flexion pattern (Elovic et al. 2009). The results of this study should help clinicians in the choice of muscles to target with botulinum toxin injections for the treatment of elbow flexor spasticity. The study also provides a methodology for the systematic evaluation of the involvement of spastic muscles in an abnormal pattern or movement in any part of the body.

Methods
Design
This study was carried out in two phases: (i) anatomical study on fresh cadavers [Ecole Européenne de Chirurgie (EEC), ‘Centre du Don de Corps’ and the Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France]; and (ii) observational study of patients with hemiplegia (Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Hôpital Poincaré, Garches, France). Patients were included between 27 March 2015 and 3 July 2015 (each patient was included for 1 day).

Determination of anatomical landmarks for brachialis nerve block, using fresh cadavers
We used a previously published method (Yang et al. 1995; Albert et al. 2000) to determine anatomical landmarks for the location of the brachialis nerve branch for selective motor block, using fresh cadavers. The age, sex and arm dominance of the cadavers was noted.

The forearm of the cadaver was positioned in supination. The musculocutaneous nerve was exposed through a linear incision between the deltoid and pectoralis major muscles, with the coracobrachialis muscle deflected laterally. The nerve was traced from the coracoid process (used as the reference point) to the middle of the elbow crease. The biceps brachii was then discarded and the branches of the musculocutaneous nerve that innervated the brachialis were identified. Four measurements [proximal-distal (mm)] were taken to describe the location of the brachialis motor branch: ‘d0’ = distance from the medial epicondyle to the coracoid process; ‘d1’ = distance from the medial epicondyle to the exit point of the brachialis motor branch from the musculocutaneous trunk; ‘d2’ = distance from the medial epicondyle to the entry point of the brachialis motor branch into the brachialis muscle (Fig. 1), and ‘r’, the depth of the needle inserted transversely from medial to lateral in the arm until it contacted the nerve (mm). The distance between the exit point of the brachial nerve from the musculocutaneous trunk and its entry into the brachialis (d1–d2) was calculated to specify the portion of the branch that could be anaesthetized to ensure a block of only the brachialis. To account for morphological differences, the distance from the medial epicondyle to the entry point of the brachialis motor branch in the muscle was expressed as the ratio between d2 and d0.

Determination of the role of each flexor muscle in the arm flexion pattern
We then tested the methodology of successive SMNB in patients with stroke. To ensure homogeneity, we chose to test it on the arm flexion pattern, as this is the most common spasticity pattern of the upper limb.

Procedure: 20 patients with stroke-related spastic hemiparesis were included after they signed the informed consent form. Inclusion criteria: ability to walk indoors, participation in a regular program of botulinum toxin injections, presence of spastic arm flexion pattern (i.e. shoulder adduction and medial rotation, elbow flexion with the forearm in neutral or pronation, and finger and wrist flexion; patterns III and IV according to the classification by Jost et al. 2014), fixed elbow flexion deformity of less than 120° (to avoid confounding factors related to altered biomechanics in the case of large muscle contractures which alter the lever arm). Exclusion criteria: refusal to participate in the study, pregnancy, not affiliated to the public health care regime, patient under guardianship or trusteeship.

First, the brachialis motor branch was blocked with 4 cm3 of Lidocaïne® 1% (located using the anatomical landmarks described above combined with electrical stimulation guidance at 0.8–1 mA). Half an hour later, the radialis motor nerve was blocked (using a medial approach, three finger-widths above the medial epicondyle) using the same procedure, in order to inhibit the brachioradialis. If the brachialis has a mixed innervation (Mahakkanukrauh & Somsarp, 2002), this SMNB will ensure complete inhibition of this muscle. It does not affect the triceps brachii, which is innervated proximally (close to the shoulder). After another half an hour, the musculocutaneous motor nerve block was performed (using a medial approach, at the base of the inferior limit of the pectoralis major and along the biceps brachii tendon).

Data collection
Age, sex, stroke aetiology, side of hemiparesis, spontaneous elbow angle in standing, active range of elbow extension in the anatomical reference position, spasticity using the Held and Tardieu scale (Tardieu et al. 1954; Gracies et al. 2010; slow velocity V1, high velocity V3 (following the Held and Tardieu anatomical position covenant), spasticity angle (V1–V3), angle of paresis (V1 – active range of motion and Tardieu grade) and the Modified Ashworth scale (Bohannon & Smith, 1987) were recorded before beginning the SMNBs.

Spontaneous elbow angle and active range of elbow extension (both with the arm by the side) were evaluated while standing with a manual goniometer, before and after each successive SMNB.

Statistical analysis
R 2.14.0 (R Development Core Team, http://www.R-project.org) software was used throughout. Data were expressed as means ± standard deviation (SD), numbers and percentages. Paired tests (Wilcoxon rank tests) were used to compare ranges of motion pre- and post-selective motor nerve block. A P-value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant throughout.

Ethical considerations
The study was registered on ClinicalTrials.gov (ID: NCT02455232). It was a non-interventional study with usual procedures and without additional procedures (diagnosis or medical supervision). In France, patient consent is not needed for such an anonymous observational study. The study was approved and piloted by our local scientific committee CIC-IT 1429, 104 bd Raymond Poincaré, 92380 Garches, France and Comité de Protection des Personnes IDF XI, Saint-Germain-en-Laye, France.

Results
Determination of anatomical landmarks for brachialis nerve block, using fresh cadavers (Table  1, Fig. 1)
Table 1. Distance from the medial epicondyle to the coracoid process (d0); from the medial epicondyle to the exit point of the brachialis motor branch (d1), and from the medial epicondyle to entry point of the brachialis motor branch (d2, mm); nerve depth (r, mm) and ratio (d2/d0, %)

Twenty forearms from 10 fresh cadavers were used for the study (six men, four women, age range 68–84 years).

The brachialis nerve branch exited from the musculocutaneous nerve trunk at a mean distance of 155 ± 10.5 mm (range 140–170) from the medial epicondyle (d1). It entered the brachialis muscle at a mean distance of 102 ± 17.9 mm (range 70–130) from the medial epicondyle (d2) and at a mean depth (r) of 28.8 ± 4.84 mm (range 20–38). The mean ratio from the medial epicondyle was 34.1% ± 0.05% (range 25.0–41.9). The brachialis branch divided from the musculocutaneous trunk 53 ± 13.7 mm [(d1–d2), range 30–80] after entering the brachialis muscle. There was no influence of the side of the dissected arm (left vs. right).

Conclusion. To block the brachialis branch of the musculocutaneous nerve, a medial approach should be used, 1–1.5 hand-widths above the medial epicondyle, just below the belly of the biceps brachii.

Determination of the role of each flexor muscle in the arm flexion pattern
Twenty patients with stroke-related spastic hemiparesis were included. Demographic data are shown in Table 2. Mean age was 55.8 years (± 11.7 from 29.4 to 68.7) and mean time since stroke was 48.2 months (± 47.9 from 5.2 to 195.8). The sex ratio was 52.6% (10 males; nine females; Tables 3-5 Fig. 2).

Table 2. Demographic data and results of the Modified Ashworth and Tardieu scores (spasticity angles V1–V3), shoulder in anatomical position and 90° flexion before the three motor nerve blocks patients with stroke, and Tardieu score (spasticity angles V1–V3) after the first SMNB

Inhibition of the brachialis muscle reduced the resting angle of the elbow in standing by a mean 35.0° [41.7%; from 87.6 ± 23.7° (min. 40.0, max. 120.0) to 52.6 ± 24.2° (min. 10.0, max. 90.0)]. Subsequent inhibition of the brachioradialis muscle resulted in a further mean decrease of 3.9° [3.9%; from 52.6 ± 24.2° (min. 10.0, max. 90.0) to 48.7 ± 23.7° (min. 10.0, max. 90.0)] and inhibition of the biceps brachii by a further mean 14.5° [16.9%; from 48.7 ± 23.7 (min. 10.0, max. 90.0) to 34.2 ± 20.7° (min. 10.0, max. 80.0)].

Inhibition of the brachialis muscle reduced the spasticity angle by a mean 22.1° [from 42.1 ± 14.0° (min. 10.0, max. 70.0) to 20.0 ± 13.3° (min. 0.0, max. 50.0)]. Subsequent inhibition of the brachioradialis muscle resulted in a further mean decrease of 4.7° [from 20.0 ± 13.3° (min. 0.0, max. 50.0) to 15.3 ± 9.5° (min. 0.0, max. 40.0)] and inhibition of the biceps brachii by a further mean 9.5° [from 15.3 ± 9.5 (min. 0.0, max. 40.0) to 5.8 ± 6.5° (min. 0.0, max. 20.0)].

Inhibition of the brachialis muscle reduced the angle of paresis by a mean 28.6° [from 49.7 ± 18.4° (min. 10, max. 75) to 21.1 ± 8.8 (min. 10, max. 40)]. Subsequent inhibition of the brachioradialis muscle resulted in a further mean decrease of 3.5° [21.1 ± 8.8 (min. 10, max. 40) to 17.6 ± 7.9° (min. 10.0, max. 30.0)] and inhibition of the biceps brachii by a further mean 10.2° [from 17.6 ± 7.9° (min. 10.0, max. 30.0) to 7.4 ± 7.1° (min. 0.0, max. 20.0)].

All changes in angle with each SMNB were significant, except for V1 (measured at low speed; Table 5).

Discussion
Statement of principal findings
The cadaver study determined that a medial approach, 1–1.5 hand-widths above the medial epicondyle, just below the belly of the biceps brachii should be used for SMNB of the brachialis muscle. The study in stroke patients demonstrated the usefulness of three sequential SMNB to determine the contribution of different muscles in a spasticity pattern. The results revealed that, in the arm flexion pattern, the muscle that reduced elbow extension to the greatest extent was brachialis (Fig. 3).

Determination of anatomical landmarks
Although the course of the musculocutaneous nerve has been described in many studies (de Moura, 1985; Flatow et al. 1989; Yang et al. 1995; Mahakkanukrauh & Somsarp, 2002), and the course and variation of the brachialis branch are well known (de Moura, 1985; Flatow et al. 1989; Yang et al. 1995; Mahakkanukrauh & Somsarp, 2002), these descriptions are only useful for surgical procedures (muscle transfer or neurotization in the case of peripheral nerve lesions; Dahlin, 2008; Songcharoen, 2008). Until now, there have been no descriptions of surface landmarks for SMNB.

During the dissections, the motor branch of the brachialis was easily identified. Discussions mainly concerned the selection of landmarks. The elbow crease and the coracoid process were chosen as reference points because they are easily palpable and have been used in previous studies (Buchanan & Erickson, 1996; Park et al. 2007). The depth of insertion of the needle is also very important but depends on morphological characteristics (gender, muscle size, dominance, etc.). These results are consistent with previous studies that assessed the location of the motor point of the brachialis muscle (Buchanan & Erickson, 1996; Park et al. 2007).

Current management of elbow flexor spasticity
The Upper Limb International Spasticity (ULIS) Survey (Aymard, 2009; Bakheit et al. 2010) was a large, prospective study that investigated practice in 122 centres around the world (76% in Europe). A total of 974 patients were included. The results showed that the injection frequency for brachioradialis, brachialis and biceps brachii was, respectively, 19, 26 and 61% in the UK, 43, 22 and 68% in Germany and 27, 46 and 31% in France. A more recent study in Australia also found that the biceps brachii was most frequently injected (46% in patients with stroke), followed by brachioradialis (29%) and brachialis (21%; Nott et al. 2014). The ULIS II study confirmed these results, showing that of 456 adults with hemiplegia (84 centres, 22 countries), 270 underwent BoNT injection in the biceps brachii (59.2%) and 156 in the brachioradialis (34.2%), whereas only 130 patients (28.5%) were injected in the brachialis (Turner-Stokes et al. 2013a). In 2010, the results from the BoTULS program showed that in the UK, only the biceps brachii and the brachioradialis muscles were injected to improve the arm flexion pattern (170 patients; Shaw et al. 2010). In 2012, results from the patient registry of outcomes in spasticity care in the USA, which included 487 patients (with stroke or traumatic brain injury), showed that 190 injections were carried out in the biceps, 159 in the brachioradialis and only 142 in the brachialis (Esquenazi et al. 2012).

It is thus very evident from the literature that the muscle that is the most frequently injected with botulinum toxin to reduce elbow flexor spasticity, is the biceps brachii. The results of the present study are therefore very important, as they suggest this is inappropriate. There are likely several reasons for the choice of muscles to inject to treat an arm flexion pattern. First, the heterogeneity of marketing authorizations between different commercialized BoNTA products in different countries strongly impacts the choice of muscles injected. Secondly, muscle function is often examined in static positions, which does not provide an indication of muscle activity in dynamic situations, including functional upper limb activities and gait. Thirdly, the biceps brachii is a superficial muscle, making it much easier to inject than the brachialis.

The results of our study show that the biceps brachii may not always play an important role in the arm flexion pattern. The biceps brachii is not a strong elbow flexor (compared with brachialis). It is a multi-joint muscle that requires good proximal stability around the scapula to function optimally, which is frequently not the case in patients with hemiplegia. The fact that it is fusiform and digastric, with its fibres terminating on a common distal tendon, means that it is less able to bear stress, and some power is lost. Moreover, the biceps brachii is a forearm supinator (along with brachioradialis when the forearm is pronated) and is therefore unlikely to generate a flexion–pronation pattern. In contrast, the brachialis is a single-joint, pennate muscle and is consequently more powerful. The direct insertion of its fibres in the fascia increases its resistance to stress and its capacity to transmit power (reflexion pulley). Therefore, based on its anatomy, the brachialis muscle is likely to play a greater role in the arm flexion pattern than the biceps brachii does.

Determination of the role of each flexor muscle in the arm flexion pattern
This study demonstrated that using a methodology of three sequential SMNBs, it was easy to differentiate between hypertonia of the brachioradialis, biceps brachii and brachialis muscles. Sequential SMNB is useful to determine appropriate treatment strategies. For example, while the block is active, muscle length can be fully examined to determine whether contractures are present. If this is the case, botulinum toxin injection is unlikely to help and surgery may be considered. The distribution of muscle involvement in the flexion pattern will also affect treatment. If the biceps brachii is found to be only slightly involved, it may be decided not to treat it to conserve its action of supination. Another flexor muscle could be injected with botulinum toxin to improve the flexion pattern.

Despite the three SMNB, full passive elbow extension was not achieved in all patients, and some spasticity persisted. This is probably because of overactivity of the accessory elbow flexors that were not blocked (flexor digitorum superficialis, pronator teres, etc.). It was likely also due to changes in the intrinsic characteristics of the muscles (internal viscosity and elasticity, clinically termed contracture). A median nerve block may be useful to differentiate between contracture and spasticity of the accessory flexor muscles.

The results showed that there was no increase in active range of elbow extension after the successive SMNBs. This was somewhat disappointing; however, it is in line with the literature that shows that motor capacity is more reduced by the loss of muscle strength than by spasticity. This should be considered in the treatment plan and goals should perhaps be orientated more towards improving passive functions than active functions. However, the short duration of action of the SMNB may have affected this result because the patients did not have time to become accustomed to the new state of their arm muscles.

Further studies are now required to compare the effects of botulinum toxin injection in the brachialis, biceps brachii and brachioradialis muscles, on active and passive range of elbow extension in patients with spastic hemiparesis. The results could then be used to determine a consensual strategy for botulinum toxin injections (sites and doses).

Limitations of the study
This study is the first to provide a systematic methodology for the accurate selection of muscles to treat to improve a spasticity pattern. The method is based on a combination of clinical experience, knowledge of muscle anatomy, and results of selective motor nerve blocks. However, the study is limited by the fact that the order of the motor nerve blocks was not randomized. Mahakkanukrauh & Somsarp (2002) found that in approximately 81.6% of cases, the brachialis muscle has a double innervation: it always receives a branch from the musculocutaneous nerve and often also from the radial nerve. This anatomical variation is one of the reasons why it was not possible to randomize the order of the motor nerve blocks. Indeed, to be sure that the brachialis nerve is blocked (to assess its impact on passive and active elbow extension), the radial nerve block must be carried out just after the brachialis nerve block. However, the results showed only a slight improvement in the angle of paresis following the radial SMNB, suggesting that few patients in the sample had a double innervation of the brachialis muscle. The other reason was that beginning distally ensures the selectivity of the motor nerve blocks; a proximal block may inhibit other muscles.

Finally, the results of the SMNBs were assessed manually. It is therefore possible that the muscles were not totally paralyzed, although the blocks were performed by experienced teams.

Generalization of the procedure
The procedure described in this study could be used for the assessment of any spasticity pattern. The systematic approach allows the extent of involvement of each muscle in a spasticity pattern or abnormal movement to be assessed fully. Treatment such as botulinum toxin or other focal treatments can therefore be targeted at the appropriate muscle, improving effectiveness (Fig. 4).

Conclusion
We determined anatomical landmarks for the performance of a motor block of the brachialis nerve. Successive SMNBs of the brachialis, brachioradialis and biceps brachii muscles in patients with stroke revealed that the brachialis muscle was the most involved in the flexion pattern, consistently with its anatomical function. We therefore suggest that the brachialis muscle should be the first target of treatment to improve an arm flexion pattern. However, our findings should be confirmed by randomized trials to evaluate the effects of botulinum toxin injection in the different flexor muscles. This systematic approach for the assessment of the muscles involved in a spasticity pattern should be further developed to determine accurately the muscles to treat with botulinum toxin injections, as well as functional surgery. The results demonstrate the importance of carrying out a comprehensive assessment of the muscles potentially involved, and not simply injecting superficial muscles or muscles that appear to be the most powerful.

Clinical message
Procedures for botulinum toxin injections must be homogenized. The hierarchy of involvement of different muscles in each spasticity pattern should be determined. The brachialis muscle appears to be the most involved in the arm flexion pattern and should be the first target for botulinum toxin injection.