Introduction

While studying gut microbiota is a promising 
approach to better understand pathophysiology and 
open novel therapeutic avenues in multiple sclerosis 
(MS), we lack fundamental knowledge about how 
disease-modifying therapies (DMTs) affect gut 
microbiota composition and metabolism. Further, 
it remains unclear whether distinct microbial taxa 
shape treatment response and drug-induced side- 
effects1.

In this context, recent publications2–6 set a spotlight 
on dimethyl fumarate (DMF), a frequently administered 
DMT. DMF is a bona fide immunometabolic 
compound with metabolic properties on the mitochondrial 
respiration of activated T cells5 and restrictive 
effects on glycolysis in lymphocytes.2,6 Yet, it is 
likely that the effects of this empirically developed, 
untargeted, small molecule reach beyond T cells,

potentially affecting other metabolically active 
human and bacterial cells. Notably, DMF, a citrate 
cycle derivative, is rapidly metabolized within the 
gastrointestinal tract and causes self-limited gastrointestinal 
side-effects in many patients.7 Indeed, cross- 
sectional observations in MS patients indicated that 
DMF may affect not only immune cells but also the 
gastrointestinal microbiota8–10, and thereby potentially 
reduce the release of direct neurotoxic 
compounds.3 However, knowledge regarding longitudinal 
alterations of the gut microbiota under DMF and 
their metabolic consequences is limited. We used the 
setting of an established prospective observational 
study,6 to explore the effect of DMF on the metabolic 
profile of the host and on the gut microbiome. 
Further, we addressed whether distinct microbial signatures 
can be linked to treatment response and 
DMF-induced side-effects.

Results

We enrolled 20 patients with relapsing-remitting 
MS (RRMS), a mean age of 42 y (range 23–59), 
and marginal female preponderance (55%) 
(Table 1). Exploring the imprint of DMF on the 
host serum metabolome and gut microbial metabolome 
in a longitudinal setup, we assessed early 
changes in patients’ metabolomes and microbiomes 
and compared them to outcomes during 12 months 
under DMF therapy (Figure 1a).

DMF alters host and microbiota metabolome

Assessing patient sera, a total of 805 compounds of 
known identity were recognized by ultrahigh- 
performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass 
spectroscopy (UPLC-MS/MS), of which 31 statistically 
significantly increased (n = 21) or decreased 
(n = 10) during the first 3 months of treatment 
(corrected for False Discovery Rate, q < 0.05). 
Additionally, we conducted a random forest (RF) 
analysis comparing baseline and three-month 
groups to rank these effects (Figure 1b). By both 
approaches, several of the top 30 biochemicals predicting 
group separation were linked to essential 
energy metabolism, specifically containing increased 
intermediates of the citrate cycle. The most

significant increases were identified for fumarate 
(2.3-fold, q = 0.008) and its neighboring metabolites 
succinate (1.5-fold, q = 0.006) and malate (1.3-fold, 
q = 0.016) (Figure 1c), in serum.

Next, we assessed longitudinal changes in the gut 
microbiome by amplicon sequencing (rarefaction 
curve eFigure 1a). While no significant changes in 
the alpha diversity (eFigure 1b) and no separate 
grouping in a non-metric multidimensional scaling 
(NMDS) representation were observed regarding 
DMF treatment (Figure 1d, eFigure S1c) or previous 
treatments (eFigure S1d), we identified significantly 
decreased (n = 2) and increased (n = 1) abundance 
of a few bacterial species under DMF treatment 
(Figure 1e). The group of decreased bacteria prominently 
included Coprococcus eutactus (Padj = 0.012), 
Enterococcus gilvus (Padj = 0.042), and – though not 
significant – Akkermansia muciniphilia (Padj 
= 0.138). Lactobacillus pentosus (Padj = 0.012) was 
significantly increased upon treatment (Figure 1e-f, 
eTables S1–2). To compare the metabolic alterations 
on the host (patient) and the microbiota (eFigure 
S1e-h), we used PICRUSt2 for imputing microbial 
metabolomics from 16S sequencing data. In the gut, 
13 metabolites were identified uniquely before treatment 
onset and 29 metabolites only after 3 months 
(Figure 1g, eTable S3). Complementing the serum 
metabolite analysis, an increased abundance of

Table 1. Clinical data of the study cohort (baseline characteristics and outcomes of each individual of the study cohort).
Baseline characteristicsOutcomesPatient 
ID*
Age 
(a)SexDisease 
courseDisease 
duration 
(a)
Previous 
disease 
activity 
(relapses/2a)Previous DMTDelay from 
previous 
DMT (d)
EDSS at 
baselineDisease 
activity 
(1: MRI, 
2: MRI + 
relapse)
Lymphopenia 
(<700/µl in 
first year)
GI 
symptomsFlushing136mRRMS0.30None-1.00001238mRRMS0.22None-2.00000345fRRMS3.80Daclizumab272.00101459fRRMS3.40Fingolimod1043.50100554fRRMS8.10Glatirameracetate123.00011643mRRMS2.30Teriflunomide532.00111750fRRMS11.70Interferon beta5462.50101957fRRMS0.92None-3.001001040fRRMS0.31None-1.501001332mRRMS0.41None-1.020001423mRRMS0.21None-2.010011542mRRMS0.22None-3.000111637fRRMS7.41Teriflunomide741.501111744mRRMS10.20Fingolimod1154.000001930mRRMS0.12None-2.000002149fRRMS0.11Glatirameracetate161.521002534mRRMS1.00Glatirameracetate170.010002727fRRMS6.54Teriflunomide623.000012950fRRMS10.60Glatirameracetate51.011003341fRRMS0.11None-2.50000


citrate cycle intermediates was observed in the 
microbiome profile under DMF treatment. Under 
treatment, we furthermore detected compound 
C05422, involved in antioxidative ascorbate, aldarate, 
and glutathione metabolism (Figure 1h).

DMF-induced lymphopenia associates with distinct 
baseline microbiome signatures

We next assessed correlations between clinical outcomes 
and microbiota composition. Notably, 
patients with or without subsequent treatment- 
associated lymphopenia clustered based on their 
microbiome composition (Figure 2a). By contrast, 
we observed no altered patterns in the NMDS representation 
for disease activity, gastrointestinal, or 
flushing side effects (eFigure S2a-c). With the exception 
of patient 16 (microbiota characterized by high 
abundances of Streptococci), all samples of the lymphopenia 
group showed a similar taxonomic pattern 
already at baseline. To assess this lymphopenia- 
associated microbiome composition, we identified 
the most relevant single species for development of 
lymphopenia (Figure 2b-c, eFigure S2d-e, metabolic 
features efigure S2f-i, excluding patient 16 due to its 
outlier status, eTables S4–6). In two independent 
analyses of our dataset, we identified a group of 
bacteria composed of A. muciniphila, Bacteroides 
dorei, Agathobacter rectale, Prevotella copri, and 
P. falseni (by LEfSe Figure 2c-d, by Euclidean vector 
assessment of a principal component analysis 
Figure 2b and eFigure S2d). Notably, these species 
discriminated between patients with and without 
subsequent lymphopenia before treatment (eFigure 
S2e). We observed a constant presence of 
A. muciniphilia and absence of P. copri with the 
occurrence of lymphopenia. Conversely, subjects 
with no lymphopenia were characterized by the

presence or absence of both A. muciniphilia and 
P. copri or the absence of A. muciniphila in presence 
of P. copri (Figure 2e). Sensitivity and specificity of 
lymphopenia prediction as side effects based solely 
on these two species was 0.85. To determine a third 
species potentially increasing the discriminatory 
power between patients with and without subsequent 
lymphopenia, we tested several combinations 
of ternary plots composed of A. muciniphila, P. copri, 
and a third species candidate – such as A. rectale – 
highlighted in the previous multivariate analyses 
(Figure 2f and eFigure S2j).

Discussion

In this study, we aimed to assess differences in the 
metabolomes of patients and their microbiota 
related to DMF treatment and identified bidirectional 
treatment-microbiota associations. While the 
treatment per se influenced the microbiota composition, 
a specific constellation of certain commensal 
taxa served as a candidate predictor for the occurrence 
of lymphopenia under treatment.

Our findings demonstrate a specific rearrangement 
of MS-associated taxa11 upon DMF treatment with 
a decrease in MS-associated proinflammatory taxa, 
such as A. muciniphilia and C. eutactus,1,12,13 and an 
increase in allegedly beneficial, anti-inflammatory 
species, like L. pentosus,10,14 substantiating previous 
cross-sectional data.8–10 Detailing the metabolic properties 
of DMF,2,5,6 we demonstrated increasing late 
citrate cycle intermediates not only in the host’s 
serum (where they had previously been hypothesized) 
but also in the microbial metabolism. Whereas these 
beneficial immunomodulatory effects in two compartments 
may be explained by simultaneous metabolic 
changes in bacteria and blood under DMF, an 
alternative interpretation would identify the changing

gastrointestinal microbiota composition as the reason 
for a cascade of effects, including lymphocyte alterations 
and a loss of neurotoxic bacterial metabolites 
observed in the serum and cerebrospinal fluid of 
patients3 (Figure 2g). The latter hypothesis may be 
supported by the short half-life of fumaric acid esters 
with rapid degradation in the citrate cycle. The gut 
microbiota are therefore privileged over circulating 
immune cells by their early, metabolically relevant 
contact with DMF. In light of the very limited understanding 
of the direct effects of fumaric acid esters on 
specific bacteria,15,16 further research will be needed to 
dissect metabolic properties of DMF on microbiota – 
and their effects on host immune cells.

Further, our observation that baseline microbiota 
composition may be a critical mediator of lymphopenia, 
as a side effect of DMF, suggests that the drug- 
microbiome interplay reaches beyond these therapeutic 
effects. Lymphopenia represents the main 
safety concern of DMF treatment due to its association 
with rare cases of progressive multifocal 
leukoencephalopathy.17 While it is known that 
patients with relevant lymphopenia are older and 
have lower baseline lymphocyte counts – specifically 
of CCR4+ T helper cells –4,18 more refined biomarkers 
for risk stratification of this severe side effect are 
utmost needed to tailor personalized treatment 
recommendations. Notably, we here observed an 
association between the baseline presence of 
A. muciniphilia and absence of P. copri with the 
development of lymphopenia during treatment. In 
turn, lymphopenia was absent in patients with 
simultaneous appearance of both A. muciniphila 
and P. copri, indicating a possible counteracting 
effect by the presence of P. copri. Of interest, these 
taxa were previously described in association with 
MS and other autoimmune disorders. Namely, 
A. muciniphilia and B. dorei1,19 – both overrepresented 
in lymphopenia patients – and P. copri were

shown to be reduced in MS patients12 but increase 
upon DMT.11 While we cannot exclude that this 
small exploratory pilot study may have been affected 
by unrecorded dietary effects or under-powered to 
identify associations for rare events – including an 
association of gut microbiota with disease activity20 – 
observations from this first longitudinal microbiome 
analysis under DMF provide pivotal evidence for 
a role of microbiota in the development of lymphopenia. 
We therefore believe that larger studies are 
warranted to evaluate the feasibility of microbiome 
testing for the prediction of DMF-associated lymphopenia 
in MS patients with implications for the 
assessment of microbiota in mediating clinically relevant 
side-effects under other DMTs.

Patients and methods

We prospectively collected stool and blood samples 
from 20 patients with RRMS intending to start DMF 
treatment, as an extension of the project previously 
published by Diebold et al. in 2018.6 Sampling for 
assessment of microbiome or metabolome predictors 
was scheduled at two early time-points: before 
first intake (baseline) and after 3 months of DMF 
treatment. Stool samples were collected using fecal 
collection kits (Epitope Diagnostics Inc., San Diego, 
CA) and stored at -80°C until further processing.

To cover a longer clinical and immunological 
follow-up, additional blood samples were collected 
after 12 months of DMF treatment. Blood samples 
from all three time points were assessed by automated 
flow cytometry for lymphocyte counts and 
major lymphocyte subpopulations (eTable 6). 
Detailed clinical information including survey of 
anamnestic and laboratory adverse events was collected 
at each time point. Assessed outcomes comprised 
adverse events (flushing and gastrointestinal 
side effects, relevant lymphopenia (<700/µl)) and

lymphopenia with Euclidean vectors representing the effects of main microbiota, excluding one individual with dominant streptococcal 
effect (b–f). (c) LEfSe analysis of dominant gastrointestinal microbiota of individuals with (right) and without (left) subsequent 
DMF-associated lymphopenia. Colored bars indicate taxa highlighted in adjunct figures. (d) Box plots of log10-transformed normalized 
relative abundances of four most affected (according to principal component analysis, 2B, and LEfSe analysis, 2C) microbial species in 
samples with (red) or without (turquoise) subsequent DMF-associated lymphopenia. (e) Bi-axial dot plot of log10-transformed relative 
abundances of Akkermansia muciniphila and Prevotella copri, color code indicating samples with (red) or without (turquoise) 
subsequent DMF-associated lymphopenia. (f) Ternary dot plot of the log10-transformed and subsequently normalized abundances 
of A. muciniphila, Agathobacter rectale, and P. copri only, color code indicating samples with (red) or without (turquoise) subsequent 
DMF-associated lymphopenia. (g) Graphical summary of findings from this study and the recent literature.
disease activity (as judged by clinical relapse and 
MRI activity) within the first 12 months of treatment. 
Disease activity was assessed by recording 
clinical relapses and/or new lesions in T2- 
weighted cerebral magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) within 12 months after treatment started 
(Figure 1a). All participants gave written consent 
before enrollment. The study was conducted as 
a nested project within the Swiss Multiple 
Sclerosis Cohort Study and approved by the Ethics 
Committee for Northwest and Central Switzerland 
(EKNZ 201448/12).

Serum metabolomics

Serum samples from the first 14 patients (available at 
the time point of analysis) within this cohort were 
characterized for metabolomics by UPLC-MS/MS, 
as described in.6 Each sample was analyzed using 
acidic positive ion conditions, basic negative ion 
optimized conditions, and negative ionization. 
Blinded data were processed and normalized by 
Metabolon Inc. (Durham, USA) for all assessed samples 
as described previously.6 Results were verified 
by paired analysis (for time points T1 and T2) for 
each observation and assessed using RF analysis on 
all measured metabolites.

Amplicon sequencing

Stool samples of all 20 patients were assessed for 
their gut microbiome composition using the 
QIAseq 16S/ITS screening panel (QIAGEN), 
sequenced on a MiSeq (Illumina). In short, samples 
were thawed and total DNA (totDNA) from 
250 mg stool was extracted with a QIAamp 
PowerFecal Pro DNA Kit (QIAGEN). Sequencing 
libraries were generated with the QIAseq 16S/ITS 
Screening Panels kit. For each sample, 1 ng of 
totDNA was amplified with each of the three 
Screening Panel Pools and subsequently combined 
and indexed. The indexed libraries were pooled 
equimolarly, and 15pM were loaded and sequenced 
PE 276 on a MiSeq v3 600-cycle kit (Illumina).

Bioinformatic & statistical analysis

The bioinformatic analysis was performed on R (R 
core team) using the phyloseq package (v.1.38.0).21

Operational taxonomic unit (OTU) abundances were 
calculated in the CLC microbiome analysis tool. 
Taxonomic annotation of the OTU reference 
sequences was done with the GTDB R89 database 
with full 16S22 and IDTAXA algorithm23 with the 
DECIPHER package (v.2.22.0) in R (v4.1.2) (R Core 
Team 2020).

The obtained OTU abundance table, OTU reference 
sequences, taxonomic annotation, and metadata 
were imported into a phyloseq object for downstream 
statistical analyses with the phyloseq package 
(v.1.38.0)21 in R. Samples counts varied between 
196166 and 846999 with a median count value of 
359300. Out of the 8667 OTUs obtained after the 
bioinformatic analysis, 3176 were removed as singletons 
and present in <1% of the samples representing 
0.073% of the overall abundances. A total of 5491 
OTUs were used for downstream analyses representing 
29 phyla, 55 classes, 119 orders, 194 families, 429 
genera, and 914 species. All samples reached sufficient 
sequencing depth according to the rarefaction curve 
based on the detected species.

Alpha diversity indices based on species composition 
(richness, Shannon, Simpson, inverse Simpson, 
and chao1) were assessed using the phyloseq package 
in R. NMDS was analyzed in R with the phyloseq 
package using compositional species table and Bray- 
Curtis algorithm. Principal component analysis 
(PCA) plots with contribution arrows as explanatory 
variables were calculated in R with the factoextra 
package (v.1.0.7) using Hellinger transformed compositional 
data of species composition. The 
Euclidean vectors were calculated using the function 
prcomp() of the package “stat” and fviz_pca_biplot() 
of the package “factoextra.” PCA with imputed 
metabolic compounds from PICRUSt2 was performed 
on Hellinger transformed abundance data.

Differential expression analysis of the bacterial 
species in baseline vs. 3 months and lymphopenia 
vs. no lymphopenia was performed with DESeq2 
package (v.1.34.0)24 in R. Deseq function was run 
on a matrix not normalized species compositional 
data from phyloseq with the parameter test = “Wald” 
and fitType = “parametric”.

Boxplots were analyzed on normalized and log10 
transformed relative abundance data of species 
composition. Samples were compared based on 
time point (baseline vs. 3 months) and side effect

(no-lymphopenia vs. lymphopenia). Significance 
was assessed with the compare_mean function of 
the ggpubr package in R using method = ”wilkox. 
test” and p.adjust.method = ”hochberg.”

Ternary plots were generated using the ggtern 
package (v.3.3.5) in R. Species count abundance 
data were log10 transformed and the values of the 
three selected species normalized. The samples 
were plotted according to the ratio of the log10 
abundance data of the three selected species.

Functional annotation for the microbiome was 
performed using PICRUSt2.25 The biom table was 
given as input to PICRUSt2. The entire pipeline 
was launched using PICRUSt2_pipeline.py command 
with default parameters.

Relative abundance OTU table and predicted pathway 
abundance tables are used as input for the LEfSe 
analysis. The OTUs and pathways that differ significantly 
between the time point groups were inferred 
from the analysis (http://huttenhower.sph.harvard. 
edu/galaxy) with default settings. The default cut-off 
score of 2 was used for logarithmic LDA score.

AMON was used to predict the origin of metabolites 
from host (human) and microbiome.26 Host 
metabolites with KEGG ids detected from the LC/ 
MS and KEGG Orthologs, which are predicted for 
the microbiome from PICRUSt2, were given as 
input to AMON along with the complete flat files 
(reaction, ko, compound, and pathways) obtained 
from KEGG FTP (Academic license).27–30 AMON 
analysis is carried out for the baseline and treatment 
groups separately. Venn diagram method 
(Jvenn http://jvenn.toulouse.inra.fr/app/example. 
html) was used to identify metabolites, which 
were unique to the microbiome at baseline and 
3 months under treatment.