1 ∣. BACKGROUND 
Surveillance and early detection of acute cellular rejection (ACR) and antibody-mediated rejection (AMR) are important determinants of treatment outcomes, transplant longevity, and patient survival.1 Currently, the reference standard of detecting acute rejection (AR) is an endomyocardial biopsy (EMB). This procedure is costly, invasive, and potentially associated with complications.2 There is strong interest in the heart transplant (HTx) community to find a non-invasive test that accurately detects and predicts AR. Donor-derived cell-free DNA (dd-cfDNA) from peripheral blood has received growing attention as a biomarker of HTx rejection and has been suggested for possible use for AR surveillance by the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation (ISHLT) and the American Society of Transplantation (AST).3,4 Cardiomyocytes damaged from AR release circulating DNA into the bloodstream that can now be measured to a high degree of sensitivity. Correlation between increased dd-cfDNA levels and AR was first shown by Snyder and colleagues using shotgun whole-genome sequencing.5 Subsequent prospective cohort studies clinically validated the use of dd-cfDNA in screening for AR in HTx recipients.6,7 Targeted amplification next-generation sequencing (NGS) significantly reduced the cost of dd-cfDNA testing that allowed for its routine use for AR detection. The standard SNP test examined in this study (AlloSure®; CareDx; Brisbane, California) was the first dd-cfDNA assay licensed for clinical use for noninvasive detection of AR in HTx patients and uses a 405 SNP panel.8 The expanded SNP test (Prospera™; Natera; Austin, Texas) is a dd-cfDNA assay that utilizes 13,292 highly polymorphic SNPs and has also been clinically validated.9 However, with the continued evolution in dd-cfDNA technology, clinical utility of dd-cfDNA may be critically influenced by technical and interpretive aspects of these assays. Thus, this study evaluates the hypothesis that the standard SNP correlates with the expanded SNP assay, and despite the apparent technical differences, that both dd-cfDNA tests perform similarly with regards to screening performance for AR. While both assays have been compared in two studies of kidney transplant patients,10,11 this is a larger study that compares the two dd-cfDNA tests specifically in the clinical practice of HTx. Additionally, we compare the testing accuracy of GEP versus standard and expanded dd-cfDNA testing for ACR.
2 ∣. MATERIAL AND METHODS 
2.1 ∣. Data sharing 
The data that support the findings of this study are openly available in Mendeley Data at 10.17632/cpyj7v99rj.2.12 
2.2 ∣. Study design 
This was a retrospective, observational study of HTx patients at the University of California, San Diego Health (UC San Diego Health) who had an EMB and both standard and expanded SNP dd-cfDNA testing in the 14 days preceding the EMB. Inclusion of an EMB performed within 14 days is based on previous literature and it also represents real world practice.13,14 Eligible subjects were HTx only recipients, 18 years of age or older, and at least 28 days post-HTx. Samples were collected from October 2020 to January 2022. Standard SNP testing refers to the use of a 405 SNP panel performed by CareDx (Brisbane, California) as part of clinical care at UC San Diego Health since October 2020. Expanded SNP testing refers to the use of a 13,292 SNP panel performed by Natera (Austin, Texas) for a separate research study for which patients had provided informed consent.9 Both standard and expanded SNP testing are CLIA (Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendment) certified but not FDA approved as standalone tests. Both dd-cfDNA tests are covered by Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) as of March 31st, 2023. During the period of this study, our protocol was to obtain standard SNP testing with surveillance EMBs to establish an appropriate threshold for performing EMB at UC San Diego Health. Thus, treatment was based on EMB results and not dd-cfDNA results. The clinical protocol for induction, steroid taper, and treatment of AR at UC San Diego Health is provided in the Appendix. As a result, we currently utilize .15% as the cutoff value for the standard SNP testing. The expanded SNP testing uses also a .15% cutoff as previously described.9 Both for cause and surveillance EMBs were included in the study cohort. Demographic and clinical data were collected for all patients. Approval for this study was provided by the UC San Diego Health Office of IRB Administration (IRB #803607). This study adheres to the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki formulated by the World Medical Association and the US Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects. GEP testing (AlloMap®; CareDx; Brisbane, California) was also performed as part of clinical care and evaluated in this study. This test has been given FDA 510(k) clearance to aid in the identification of adult HTx patients who are at low risk for moderate/severe ACR. GEP testing is recommended after 55 days from HTx for ACR surveillance.15 GEP testing was considered positive if the score was > = 30 between 2 and 6 months post-HTx or > = 34 after 6 months post-HTx.16,17 
2.3 ∣. Biopsy-defined rejection 
We followed the ISHLT classification scheme and defined ISHLT grades 2R and 3R as clinically significant ACR and ISHLT grades pAMR1(H+ or I+), pAMR2 and pAMR3 as clinically significant AMR.18,19 AR refers to either clinically significant ACR, AMR, or both (mixed ACR and AMR). 
2.4 ∣. Clinical outcomes 
All HTx patients were followed for all-cause death. Cause of death was determined by review of the clinical charts by an experienced HTx cardiologist (PK). 
2.5 ∣. Statistical analyses 
The primary analysis was to compute the sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV), and negative predictive value (NPV) for the biomarker assays as screening tests for AR. To account for intraclass correlation related to multiple tests per patient, we implemented hierarchical bootstrapping; an equal number of patients as in our study was sampled at random with replacement, and then for each sampled patient the same number of observations for this patient as in the original dataset was sampled with replacement. This process was repeated 10,000 times, in order to generate approximate sampling distributions for the statistics of interest. The mean and 95% confidence interval (CI) for each statistic were taken from the bootstrap sampling distribution. The p-value of the comparison between assays is based on the tail probability of the value of 0 (no difference) in the bootstrap distribution of the difference statistic, multiplied by two (two-tailed test). Number of AR, AMR, ACR, and positive biomarker assays were also calculated by performing hierarchical bootstrapping and repeating this 10,000 times. The correlation of standard and expanded SNP assays was evaluated using mixed-effects logistic regression, with participant-specific random effects, to account for repeated measures within patients. The standard and expanded SNP test results were dichotomized to above or below the lower limit of quantitation, with cutoff values for both assays being .15%.8,9,16 The agreement rate between standard and expanded SNP was also analyzed by Cohen’s kappa statistics. Mixed effects logistic regression with participant-specific random effects was performed to identify potential co-predictors of AR, in addition to dd-cfDNA and GEP assay results as primary predictors. Forward model selection using a p-value less than .15 threshold was used to identify potential co-predictors. Fisher’s exact test was used for comparing independent proportions of cytomegalovirus (CMV) viremia in the EMB negative cases with GEP testing. Analysis was conducted in R (RCore Team, 2022) with lme4 package for mixed effect modeling (v1.1-28)20 and fmsb package for Cohen’s kappa (v0.7.5).21 Figures were produced using the package ggplot2 (v3.3.5).22 We used the Bonferroni-Holm procedure whenever multiple comparisons were performed while implementing a particular statistical hypothesis test. The corrected p values are designated as pc. For single hypothesis testing we report the unadjusted p value. P or pc < .05 are considered significant. 
3 ∣. RESULTS 
3.1 ∣. Characteristics of study population 
A total of 700 samples from 139 unique HTx patients with expanded SNP testing and contemporaneous EMB were eligible for the study (Figure 1). Expanded SNP testing was not able to be measured in four samples because of either loss of sample in transportation (n = 2) or low-quality reads (n = 2). Of the remaining 696 samples (original dataset), we identified 428 samples from 112 unique HTx patients (matched dataset) with standard SNP testing performed within 14 days preceding the EMB. Within these 428 samples, 316 (73.8%) also had a corresponding GEP result. Patients were predominantly male (77.7%) and white (40.2%) with a median age of 60.0 years (IQR, 46.8-65.3 years; Table 1). The most reported indication for HTx was non-ischemic cardiomyopathy (67.9%). Median time from HTx to EMB was 114 days (IQR, 65-200 days). Median time difference between standard and expanded SNP testing was 1 day (IQR, 0-7 days; Figure S1). There were 187 person-years in this study from subject enrollment to end of follow-up. The observed AR prevalence was 3.0%, which also matched our bootstrap prevalence (Table S1). Table S2 summarizes the clinical information relevant for the 13 samples associated with AR. We observed higher prevalence of ACR (2.3%) compared to AMR (.7%) in our cohort. 
3.2 ∣. Association of standard with expanded SNP testing
We observed 323 (75.5%) samples at or below the limit of quantitation for standard and 140 (32.7%) samples for expanded SNP testing. Due to the high proportion of observations at or below the limit of quantitation, we assessed correlation of standard with expanded SNP testing using cutoff values of .15% for both assays.8,9,16 Table S3 shows cross-tables of the biomarker assays compared to AR diagnosis by EMB. We found a positive standard SNP result correlated with a positive expanded SNP result with an odds ratio (OR) of 54.0 (23.3, 125.5; p < .001; Figure 2). Consistent with this finding, we found standard and expanded SNP to show substantial agreement with a Cohen’s kappa of .69 (.59, .78; p < .001). Sensitivity analysis restricting the matched samples to 3 days time difference (n = 280 samples),8,23 also showed strong correlation that was statistically significant (p < .001) with a Cohen’s kappa of .74 (p < .001). We also found the standard and expanded dd-cfDNA tests to be concordant in 11 out of 13(85%) positive AR samples and did not find a significant difference in paired proportions using the McNemar test (p = 1.0). 
3.3 ∣. Test performance to detect AR 
Both standard and expanded SNP dd-cfDNA tests showed no significant difference in testing accuracy for AR (Table S4). Sensitivity with standard SNP was 39% and expanded SNP testing also 39% (p = .66). Specificity with standard SNP was 82% and expanded SNP testing 84% (p = .26). PPV with standard SNP was 6.2% and expanded SNP testing 7.0% (p = .70). NPV with standard and expanded SNP testing were both 98% (p = .76). Furthermore, we evaluated the screening performance of combining GEP with standard SNP testing (standard dd-cfDNA + GEP), commercially packaged as HeartCare® (CareDx; Brisbane, California; Figure 3).15,24 Standard dd-cfDNA + GEP testing was considered positive if either standard dd-cfDNA or GEP tests were at or above the established cutoffs. We found specificity of standard dd-cfDNA + GEP was 47%, which was significantly lower when compared to either standard or expanded SNP dd-cfDNA tests individually (pc < .001). Evaluating GEP for detection of ACR (Table S5), we showed GEP specificity was significantly lower than standard SNP dd-cfDNA (pc < .001) but otherwise did not show a significant difference for sensitivity, PPV, and NPV for detection of ACR. Although there was a trend for increased prevalence of cytomegalovirus (CMV) viremia in the EMB negative, GEP positive (4.2%) versus EMB negative, GEP negative cases (1.9%), this was not statistically significant (p = .32). Standard dd-cfDNA + GEP similarly showed significantly reduced specificity versus standard SNP testing alone for detection of ACR (pc < .001). Using mixed-effects logistic regression with forward model selection, we observed that the subject’s age, race and ethnicity, history of either ACR or AMR, and number of months since HTx were also important co-predictors of AR with either standard or expanded SNP dd-cfDNA testing as the primary predictor (Table S6). However, a positive standard dd-cfDNA + GEP result was not predictive for AR. 
3.4 ∣. Clinical outcomes 
For clinical outcomes, we observed 8 (7.1%) deaths (Table S7 and Figure S2). The majority (50%) of deaths were due to infection or cancer. AR accounted for 25% of deaths. One AR episode associated with death was positive for both standard and expanded SNP testing while the other AR episode did not undergo dd-cfDNA testing. 
4 ∣. DISCUSSION 
The main finding of our study is that the results of both dd-cfDNA tests, standard and expanded SNP, were significantly correlated and did not show significant difference in the noninvasive detection of AR in HTx patients. In addition, we found significantly reduced specificity without improved sensitivity with the addition of GEP to dd-cfDNA testing. To the best of our knowledge, this is also the first study, outside of the sponsored CARGO II and OAR registries, to provide matched GEP and EMB results for evaluation of testing accuracy. Expanded differs from the standard SNP assay by utilizing more 10,000+ more SNPs, with the potential benefit of achieving sufficient genetic diversity between donor and recipient DNA to enable confident differentiation of DNA source without a priori knowledge of donor and recipient genotypes. Though use of additional SNPs may have bioinformatic applications beyond the scope of this study, these technical differences do not show a direct impact on discrimination of AR in HTx patients in this study. Though the specificity for detection of AR as compared to histopathology was high, sensitivity for both dd-cfDNA tests was relatively low. The sensitivity was lower compared to some previously published studies but similar to others.6-9 Agbor-Enoh used shotgun sequencing which is a very different technique from targeted NGS that both standard and expanded SNP testing utilize. Apart from technique, the differences in testing accuracy are also explained by the different prevalence of AMR for the studies as dd-cfDNA testing better detects AMR compared to ACR.7-9,25 The prevalence of AR in our matched cohort is comparable to 25% rejection prevalence observed in recent literature.7,8,14 The low AR prevalence in the current era is attributed to modern immunosuppression and improved post-HTx care.7,8,16,26 Additionally, it was reassuring to see the majority of the deaths in our matched cohort were not due to AR. This is consistent with recent literature showing low mortality due to AR in the current era.13,14 Of note, at UCS an Diego Health, a weekly pathologic review of all EMB samples are performed by a panel of three anatomic pathologists, led by our senior pathologist, in addition to our HTx cardiologist group for more consistent pathologic reads. This practice has been in place at our institution since 2012 in response to the known interobserver variability for the pathologic diagnosis of AR.27 It is likely that even this structured approach does not fully mitigate some of the diagnostic limitations of histopathology. Because of the low prevalence of AR, the NPV without testing already starts very high at 97% in our study and 98.4% in a recent large, multi-center observational study.14 The low PPV has also been observed in other recent studies for dd-cfDNA.13,28,29 In our study, the probability of rejection for the expanded SNP assay moves from 3.0% pretest to 7.5% post-test for a positive test and 2.2% post-test for a negative test. As a result, in the setting of low AR prevalence, the value of dd-cfDNA testing is mostly derived from the high specificity. Thus, for the current commercial methodology of targeted NGS that quantifies dd-cfDNA as a percentage of total circulating cell-free DNA, we do not find clinically meaningful differences between the standard or expanded SNP panel. Additional test modifications such as the use of dd-cfDNA absolute quantity9,30 may result in further increase in testing accuracy and would be of interest to evaluate in future studies. We also evaluated the use of standard dd-cfDNA + GEP (Heart-Care®, CareDx; Brisbane, California) as they are recommended to be used together to utilize both the superior detection of AMR by dd-cfDNA and the specific development of GEP for detecting ACR.15,31 However, we found significantly decreased specificity compared to either standard or expanded SNP dd-cfDNA tests alone. This was due to a significant decrease in specificity for ACR by GEP testing, which was also observed in the OAR registry.14 Thus, we did not find any benefit for detection of ACR with GEP on top of dd-cfDNA testing. Recently, Henricksen and coauthors showed similar survival with dd-cfDNA + GEP testing compared to GEP alone.13 However, our findings suggest that dd-cfDNA testing, without GEP, is sufficient. The use of dd-cfDNA testing alone would also provide more flexibility as blood samples can be obtained at the patient’s home due to the stability of cell-free DNA at room temperature for up to 14 days.15 With low AR prevalence and incidence of deaths from AR, we believe there is clinical equipoise that allows future prospective randomized control trials to address how to best implement dd-cfDNA testing into clinical practice for HTx. The noninvasive surveillance strategy of expanded dd-cfDNA testing alone will be evaluated in an upcoming clinical trial (NCT05081739: DETECT). Another study (NCT05459181: MOSAIC) plans to study whether standard dd-cfDNA + GEP testing can guide decrease in overall immunosuppression and minimization of tacrolimus in a low risk HTx population. 
4.1 ∣. Limitations 
Limitations of this study include: (1) This was a retrospective study from a single center and may not necessarily represent the experience of other centers with a different patient demographic. In particular, black patients are underrepresented in our study population compared to the UNOS database in the current era.32 However, the AR prevalence remained low (4.4%) with a 44% black patient cohort in a recent study.7 (2) The vast majority of samples obtained for this study were drawn early post-HTx with a median sample time of 114 days from HTx. Thus, conclusions from samples obtained further out from HTx cannot be confidently made. (3) The time difference between standard and expanded SNP testing may also be a confounding variable. However, the median time difference was only 1 day in our study and we found similar results in our sensitivity analysis restricting the sample time difference to 3 days. (4) Despite the larger number of samples used, our study remains underpowered to detect smaller differences between standard and expanded SNP testing that may exist. (5) The sensitivity, specificity, PPV, and NPV calculated for standard dd-cfDNA + GEP were performed on a 316-sample subset of the matched dataset. Although this still accounted for 74% of the matched dataset, selection bias is a potential confounder in the analysis of the results. (6) This study utilized cutoffs recommended by previous studies or based on UC San Diego Health’s experience, and it is possible that clinicians will eventually adopt more nuanced cutoffs based on the clinical context of individual patients. 
5 ∣. CONCLUSION 
This study shows there is no significant difference in testing accuracy for AR in HTx patients when comparing standard and expanded SNP dd-cfDNA tests. We also show significantly improved specificity without reducing sensitivity for AR using dd-cfDNA 