Coronary heart disease (CHD) is the leading cause 
of death globally1 and with obesity as an important 
risk factor behind CHD, the recent obesity 
epidemic among children as well as adults is a major 
health concern.2–4 Some epidemiological studies have 
described an association between body mass index 
(BMI) in childhood and coronary events in adulthood.5,6 
Two recent publications using the Mendelian randomization 
approach in the large UK Biobank cohort 
confirm the association between self-reported size in 

childhood and adult CHD,7 and BMI during childhood 
and adult asthma,8 but further demonstrate that the 
associations are mainly mediated through high BMI 
in midlife.7,8 Furthermore, a high BMI in late adolescence 
has been reported to associate with increased 
risk of CHD.9–11 Taken together, there is observational 
evidence of an association between a high BMI both 
in childhood and adolescence and adult CHD, but the 
relative contribution of childhood BMI, pubertal BMI 
change, and midlife BMI, and the mechanisms behind 

this association, are not clear. We have previously demonstrated 
that the correlation between childhood BMI 
and pubertal BMI change is marginal, indicating that 
these 2 developmental parameters, reflecting childhood 
and puberty, have the potential to contribute nonoverlapping 
information as risk markers for adult disease.12 
This is further supported by our previous findings that 
pubertal BMI change, but not childhood BMI, predicts 
cardiovascular mortality,12 stroke,13 heart failure,14 and 
asthma.15 However, the associations between pubertal 
BMI change and coronary artery atherosclerosis and 
the risk of adult acute coronary events have not been 
evaluated. Furthermore, it is not known whether pubertal 
BMI change may affect the atherosclerotic disease 
process independently of midlife BMI. 

As part of the population-based BEST (BMI Epidemiology 
Study) in Gothenburg, Sweden, information 
on childhood BMI and young adult BMI shortly after 
puberty has been collected for men born between 
1945 and 1961. The recruitment base of this cohort 
overlaps with the Gothenburg parts of the SCAPIS 
(Swedish Cardio Pulmonary Bioimage Study), with a 
thorough cardiovascular characterization including coronary 
artery calcification (CAC) score using computed 
tomography.16 This overlap between the cohorts gives 
a unique opportunity to study the association between 
BMI during development and both adult coronary atherosclerosis 
and risk of adult acute coronary events in 
individuals from the BEST Gothenburg cohort. We have 
previously demonstrated that pubertal BMI change, 
but not childhood BMI, is independently associated 
with cardiovascular mortality.12 In the present study, we 
evaluated our hypothesis that pubertal BMI change is, 
independently of midlife BMI, associated with midlife 
CAC score, reflective of the atherosclerotic process in 
the coronary arteries, and with incidence and severity of 
acute coronary events. 

METHODS 

The data that support the findings of this study are available 
from the corresponding author upon reasonable request and 
upon approval from the University of Gothenburg according to 
mandatory national law but are not publicly available due to 
privacy and ethical restrictions. 

Study Population 

The BMI Epidemiology Study Gothenburg 

The population-based BEST Gothenburg cohort was initiated 
with the overall aim to study the impact of BMI during 
childhood and puberty on adult diseases as previously 
described.12–14 We collected data on height and weight during 
development from school health care records and at 
young adult age from military conscription tests (see also 
Appendix and Table I in the Data Supplement). Because 
almost exclusively men underwent conscription, pubertal 
BMI change could only be estimated in males. The ethics 
committee of the University of Gothenburg, Sweden 
approved the BEST Gothenburg study. 

The Linked BEST Gothenburg-SCAPIS Sub-Cohort 

SCAPIS is a prospective observational study16 with data collection 
at 6 university hospitals in Sweden and a thorough cardiovascular 
characterization including computed tomography of 
the coronary arteries. For a more detailed description of the 
SCAPIS cohort, see Appendix in the Data Supplement. Written 
and oral consent was obtained from all SCAPIS subjects. 

The BEST Gothenburg cohort shares its recruitment 
base with the SCAPIS pilot study and SCAPIS Gothenburg. 
Through linkage between the BEST Gothenburg and the 
SCAPIS cohorts using the individuals’ personal identity 
number, we obtained information on CAC score, midlife 
BMI, and risk factors for cardiovascular disease from 
SCAPIS linked to information on developmental BMI for a 
sub-cohort of the BEST Gothenburg cohort that overlaps 
with SCAPIS (n=922). The linked BEST Gothenburg— 
SCAPIS sub-cohort is representative of the populationbased 
complete BEST Gothenburg cohort (See results in 
the Data Supplement and Table). The ethics committee of 
the University of Gothenburg, Sweden, approved the BEST 
Gothenburg—SCAPIS linkage study. 

Table. Cohort Description of the BMI Epidemiology Study 
Gothenburg Cohort and the BEST Gothenburg-SCAPIS Sub-
Cohort 

Exposures and outcomes 
BEST Gothenburg 
cohort 
(n=37672) 
BEST-SCAPIS 
sub-cohort 
(n=922) 
Developmental period 
Anthropometrics 
Birthweight, kg* 3.6 (3.3–3.9) 3.6 (3.3–4.0) 
Childhood BMI at age 8 y, 
kg/m2 
15.6 (14.8–16.4) 15.6 (14.8–16.3) 
Young adult BMI at age 20 
y, kg/m2 
21.1 (19.7–22.6) 21.2 (19.9–22.7) 
.pBMI, kg/m2 5.4 (4.4–6.7) 5.6 (4.5–6.8) 
Overweight status 
Childhood overweight 2358 (6.3%) 54 (5.5%) 
Young adult overweight 2790 (7.4%) 71 (7.2%) 
Country of birth 
Sweden 31407 (83.4%) NA 
Other 6265 (16.6% NA 
Adult analyses 
CAC score =1 NA 556 (56.0%) 
Covariates at the same time as CAC analyses 
Age, y NA 59.5 (3.4) 
BMI, kg/m2 NA 26.9 (24.7–29.2) 
Total cholesterol, mmol/L NA 5.4 (4.8–6.1) 
Triglycerides, mmol/L NA 1.2 (0.84–1.6) 
Systolic blood pressure, 
mmHg 
NA 123 (114–135) 
Diastolic blood pressure, 
mmHg 
NA 75 (68–81) 
Smoker NA 103 (10.4%) 
Outcomes 
Acute coronary event 1873 (5.0%) NA 
Death due to first acute 
coronary event among the 
1873 cases 
408 (21.8%) NA 

For the acute coronary event outcomes, 37672 Swedish men were followed 
for a mean of 39.9 (9.4) years after age 20 y. The CAC score analyses were 
performed in the linked BEST Gothenburg-SCAPIS sub-cohort (n=922). Childhood 
overweight and obesity at age 8 y24 were defined as BMI =17.9 kg/m2 while 
young adult overweight and obesity at age 20 y were defined as BMI =25.0 kg/ 
m2. Values are given as median (IQR) for continuous not normally distributed 
parameters, mean (SD) for normally distributed continuous parameters or number 
(%) for dichotomous parameters. BEST indicates BMI Epidemiology Study; BMI, 
body mass index; CAC, coronary artery calcification; IQR, interquartile range; NA, 
not available; SCAPIS, Swedish CArdio Pulmonary bioImage Study; and .pBMI, 
BMI at 20 y minus BMI at 8 y. 

*Birthweight was available in a subsample (BEST Gothenburg, n=35662; 
BEST Gothenburg- SCAPIS sub-cohort, n=899). 

Exposures From the BEST Gothenburg Study 

Prepubertal childhood BMI at 8 years of age and young 
adult BMI at 20 years of age were calculated using all 
paired height and weight measurements in the period 
between 6.5 and 9.5 years of age for prepubertal childhood 
BMI, and in the period 17.5 to 22 years of age for young 
adult BMI as previously described12 (see Materials in the 

Data Supplement). Pubertal BMI change was defined as the 
difference between young adult BMI (at age 20) and childhood 
BMI (at age 8). 

CAC Score, Midlife BMI, and Cardiovascular 
Risk Factors From SCAPIS 

Midlife CAC Score 

CAC was assessed using a state-of-the-art multi-slice computed 
tomography scanner (Siemens, Somatom Definition 
Flash, Siemens Medical Solution, Forchheim, Germany, see 
also Materials in the Data Supplement). The calcium content 
in each coronary artery was measured, summed, and quantified 
using the Agatston score.17 An Agatston score =1 was 
defined as having CAC. This level has previously been demonstrated 
to be significantly associated with increased CHD 
risk and to indicate atherosclerosis in the coronary arteries.
18 CAC score was not measured in the presence of a 
cardiac stent or if there was a history of a previous by-pass 
surgery (Figure 1). 

Midlife BMI 

Body weight at physical examination in SCAPIS was measured 
on a balance scale with subjects dressed in light indoor clothing 
without shoes. Body height was measured to the nearest 
centimeter. Midlife BMI was calculated as weight in kilograms 
divided by height in meters squared. 

Midlife Cardiovascular Risk Factors 

Systolic and diastolic blood pressures were measured twice 
in each arm with an automatic device (Omron M10-IT, Omron 
Health care Co, Kyoto, Japan), and the mean of the measurements 
was used. Total cholesterol was measured in venous 
blood after an overnight fast (Cobas 8000 Roche Diagnostica 
Scandinavia AB). Smoking was self-reported in questionnaires 
as current smoker or past/never smoker. 

Outcome From National Registers for the BEST 
Gothenburg Cohort 

The 37672 men in the BEST Gothenburg cohort were followed 
from 20 years of age until an acute coronary event, 
or censoring due to death or migration, or until December 
31, 2016, whichever came first. The outcomes, acute coronary 
event and death due to acute coronary event, were 
defined according to the International Classification of 
Diseases system (Table II in the Data Supplement). Death 
due to a coronary event was defined as death within 28 
days after the event. 

Statistical Analyses 

We used an age-adjusted logistic regression model to 
calculate odds ratios for a CAC score =1 (ie, adjusted for 
age at CAC score measurement). The model was further 
adjusted for midlife BMI at CAC score measurement and 
major CHD risk factors. Cox proportional hazards regressions 
were used to analyze the association between expo-
sures (childhood BMI and pubertal BMI change) and acute 
coronary events. The Cox regression model was adjusted 
for country of birth and birth year in Figure 3, for birth year, 

Figure 1. Flow chart of included individuals. 

ACE indicates acute coronary events; BEST, BMI Epidemiology Study; BMI, body mass index; CAC, coronary artery calcification; PIN, 
personal identity number; and SCAPIS, Swedish Cardio Pulmonary BioImage Study. 

country of birth, and birthweight in Table III in the Data 
Supplement, for birth year, country of birth, and education 
level in Table IV in the Data Supplement, for birth year in 
Table V in the Data Supplement and for country of birth 
and birth year in Table VI in the Data Supplement. A P 
value of <0.05 was interpreted as statistically significant. 
The assumption of proportional hazards was confirmed 
for all variables in the model including overweight groups. 
However, in the model containing pubertal BMI change as a 
continuous parameter, we detected violation of the assumption 
of proportional hazards and therefore, the follow-up in 
subsequent analyses was split on the median age at diagnosis 
(56.7 years) and the associations are presented separately 
for risk of early (=56.7 years of age) and late (>56.7 
years of age) acute coronary events. Birth weight, childhood 
BMI (at 8 years), and young adult BMI (at 20 years) were 
not normally distributed and have been log-transformed in 
analyses where they are included as continuous variables. 
Kaplan-Meier survival plot of survival free of acute coronary 
events was performed with subjects categorized according 
to overweight status at 8 and 20 years of age and significance 
tested using a log-rank test between the groups with 
adjustment for multiple testing (3 comparisons). We used a 
cumulative incidence plot to assess competing risk. Missing 
values were not imputed. 

RESULTS 
Pubertal BMI Change Displays Modest 
Associations With Both Childhood BMI and 
Midlife BMI 

We followed 37672 Swedish men born 1945 to 1961 
from the BEST Gothenburg cohort with data on both 
childhood BMI at 8 years of age and young adult BMI 
at 20 years of age (Figure 1). Through linkage with the 
SCAPIS study, to form the BEST-SCAPIS sub-cohort, 
we retrieved data on midlife CAC score, midlife BMI, 
and major risk factors for CHD measured at the time of 
CAC score measurement (mean age at CAC score measurement 
59.5 years [3.4]; n=922; Table). Among the 
37672 in the complete BEST Gothenburg cohort, 1873 
first acute coronary events (fatal and nonfatal) were 
diagnosed and retrieved from national registers during 
1504242 person-years follow-up (mean follow-up, 39.9 

[9.4] years) from age 20 years until December 31, 2016 
(Table). The mean age at acute coronary event diagnosis 
was 55.9 [7.8] years. The correlation between childhood 
BMI and pubertal BMI change was marginal in the linked 

BEST—SCAPIS sub-cohort (Pearson’s r=0.04, n=922), 
similarly as previously reported for the complete BEST 
Gothenburg cohort.12 A modest correlation between 
pubertal BMI change and middle age BMI (Pearson’s 
r=0.37; variance explained [r2]=14%) was found in the 
linked BEST-SCAPIS sub-cohort. Thus, pubertal BMI 
change contributes information that is largely (86%) 
nonoverlapping with midlife BMI, demonstrating that 
pubertal BMI change may have the potential to be an 
independent risk marker for disease. 

Associations Between Pubertal BMI Change 
and CAC Score in the BEST-SCAPIS Sub-
Cohort 

The linked BEST -SCAPIS sub-cohort was used to 
evaluate the association between the developmental 
BMI parameters and CAC score, (n=922; Figure 1). The 
CAC score was dichotomized into no coronary calcification 
(CAC score, 0), or coronary calcification (CAC score, 
=1). As many as 556 (56.0%) of the men had a midlife 
CAC score =1. Childhood BMI was not associated with 
CAC score in any model evaluated (Figure 2). In contrast, 
an age-adjusted logistic regression model revealed that 
pubertal BMI change was significantly associated with 
CAC score (Figure 2), and adjustment for childhood BMI 
did not alter the observed direct association between 
pubertal BMI change and CAC score (odds ratio per SD 
increase, 1.31 [1.14–1.52]). Importantly, the significant 
association between pubertal BMI change and coronary 


Figure 2. Associations between pubertal body mass index 
(BMI) change and coronary artery calcification (CAC) score in 
the BEST-SCAPIS (BMI Epidemiology Study, Swedish Cardio 
Pulmonary BioImage Study) sub-cohort. 

Odds ratios (ORs; 95% CI) per SD increase for childhood BMI 
(upper) and pubertal BMI change (lower) in relation to a CAC 
score =1 were calculated using logistic regression models (n=922). 
The different models were adjusted as indicated in the figure first in 
both the upper and lower part for age at CAC score measurement 
(n=922), in the middle analysis in both parts for age at CAC score 
analysis and midlife BMI at the time of the CAC score measurement 
(n=922), and in the bottom analysis in both parts for age at CAC 
score measurement, midlife BMI and the major risk factors for 
coronary heart disease; smoking (n=922), systolic blood pressure 
(n=922), and cholesterol levels (n=917) determined at the time of 
the CAC score measurement. 

calcification was maintained after adjustment for midlife 
BMI measured at the time of CAC score measurement 

(59.5 [3.4] years; Figure 2). We next evaluated the association 
between pubertal BMI change and 3 major cardiovascular 
risk factors that besides midlife BMI may 
mediate the association between pubertal BMI change 
and CAC score. The pubertal BMI change was modestly 
associated with cholesterol levels (SD change per SD 
increase in pubertal BMI change, -0.075 [95% CI, -0.14 
to -0.01]) and systolic blood pressure (SD change per 
SD increase in pubertal BMI change, 0.080 [95% CI, 
0.02–0.14]), while it was not significantly associated with 
smoking status (odds ratio per SD increase in pubertal 
BMI change, 1.06 [95% CI, 0.86–1.29]; all models 
adjusted for age at risk factor measurement). In addition, 
when these 3 cardiovascular risk factors were included 
as covariates, the strength of the association between 
pubertal BMI change and CAC score was not attenuated, 
suggesting that it is unlikely that the observed association 
is mediated to a substantial part via any of these 3 
risk factors (Figure 2). We also evaluated the association 
between pubertal BMI change and CAC score =100 
(odds ratio, 1.41 [95% CI, 1.16–1.72]; full model [CAC 
score 0, referent]). 
Associations Between Childhood and Young 
Adult Overweight Groups and the Risk of 
Adult Acute Coronary Events in the BEST 
Gothenburg Cohort 

Using the complete BEST Gothenburg cohort linked with 
information from national Swedish registers (n=37672), 
we evaluated the associations between overweight during 
childhood and young adulthood and the risk of adult 
acute coronary events. Individuals who became overweight 
during puberty, that is, with normal weight at age 
8 years and overweight at age 20 years, had a substantially 
increased risk of an acute coronary event in adulthood 
compared with men who were never overweight 
(Figure 3A). The group that was overweight throughout 
childhood and adolescence also had an increased risk 
compared with the normal weight group. In contrast, the 
group with overweight at 8 years of age that normalized 
during puberty, that is, normal weight at age 20, did not 
have an increased risk of an adult acute coronary events 
compared with the group with normal weight throughout 
childhood and young adulthood (Figure 3A). In total, 408 
of the 1873 men with an acute coronary event died within 
28 days from the event. Interestingly, when we evaluated 
the association between developmental overweight 
status and death due to the acute coronary events, only 
the group that was normal weight at age 8 years and 
overweight at 20 years had significantly increased risk 
of death due to the event, compared with individuals with 
normal weight at both 8 and 20 years. No significantly 
increased risk was seen for the group with overweight 

Figure 3. Associations between childhood and young adult 
overweight groups and the risk of adult acute coronary 
events and death due to the event in the BEST (BMI 
Epidemiology Study) Gothenburg cohort. 
A, Acute coronary events: hazard ratios (HRs) for the risk of an 
acute coronary event in the complete cohort (n=37 672) were 
calculated using Cox proportional hazards regression adjusted 
for birth year and country of birth. Normal weight/normal weight 
(=reference; normal weight at both 8 and 20 y of age) n=33 514 
(event cases: 1573), overweight/normal weight (overweight 
at 8, normal weight at 20) n=1368 (70), normal weight/ 
overweight (normal weight at 8, overweight at 20) n=1800 (156), 
overweight/overweight (overweight at both 8 and 20 y of age) 
n=990 (74). B, Death due to the acute coronary events: HRs for 
the risk of death due to the acute coronary event in the complete 
cohort (n=37 672) were calculated using Cox proportional 
hazards regression adjusted for birth year and country of birth. 
Normal weight/normal weight (=reference) n=33 514 (341 died), 
overweight/normal weight n=1368 (13 died), normal weight/ 
overweight n=1800 (41 died), overweight/overweight n=990 
(13 died). C, Death due to the acute coronary event among 
individuals with an acute coronary event: HRs for the risk of death 
due to the acute coronary event among individuals with an acute 
coronary event (n=1873) were calculated using Cox proportional 
hazards regression adjusted for birth year and country of birth. 
Normal weight/normal weight n=1573 (=reference; 341 died), 
overweight/normal weight n=70 (13 died), normal weight/ 
overweight n=156 (41 died), overweight/overweight n=74 (13 
died). Childhood overweight at 8 y of age24 was defined as body 
mass index (BMI) =17.9 kg/m2 while young adult overweight at 
20 y of age was defined as BMI =25 kg/m2. All models have been 
adjusted for birth year and country of birth. 

at age 8 followed by normal weight at 20 years, or the 
group that was overweight at both 8 and 20 years, compared 
with individuals with normal weight at both 8 and 
20 years (Figure 3B). 

In addition, we observed unaltered results in models 
adjusted for birthweight (Table III in the Data Supplement) 
or education level (Table IV in the Data Supplement) as 
well as in a subgroup only including men born in Sweden 
and whose both parents were born in Sweden (Table V in 
the Data Supplement). A Kaplan-Meier survival plot analysis 
confirmed a higher risk of acute coronary events for 
men who became overweight during puberty and those 
who were overweight throughout childhood and puberty, 
but not those overweight at 8 years who normalized their 
weight during puberty, compared with those who were 
never overweight (Figure 4). Cumulative incidence plots 
of acute coronary events and nonacute coronary events 
mortality did not indicate that there was competing nonacute 
coronary mortality influencing the findings (Figure 
IA and IB in the Data Supplement). 

Association Between Childhood and Young 
Adult Overweight and Risk of Death Due to 
the Acute Coronary Event, Among Subjects 
With a First Acute Coronary Event in the BEST 
Gothenburg Cohort 

To investigate the role of developmental overweight status 
for the severity of the acute coronary event, we also 
evaluated the association between the overweight groups 
and the risk of death due to the acute coronary events 
among individuals with a first adult acute coronary event 
(Figure 3C). Individuals who became overweight during 
puberty had an increased risk of death due to the acute 
coronary event, compared with men who were never 
overweight (hazard ratio, 1.51 [1.09–2.08], Figure 3C). In 
contrast, neither the group that was overweight throughout 
childhood and adolescence, nor the group with overweight 
at 8 years of age that normalized during puberty, 
had an increased risk of death due to the acute coronary 
event compared with men who were never overweight 
(Figure 3C). Thus, among individuals with acute coronary 
events in adulthood, specifically overweight with pubertal 
onset is associated with increased risk of death in connection 
with the coronary event. 

The Direct Association Between Pubertal BMI 
Change and the Risk of Acute Coronary Events 
in the BEST Gothenburg Cohort Is Nonlinear 

When evaluated as a continuous parameter, pubertal 
BMI change displayed a robust, nonlinear (P<0.001 for 
nonlinearity) association with the risk of acute coronary 
events. Due to violation of the assumption of proportional 
hazards for pubertal BMI change as a continuous 

parameter, the follow-up was split into early and late 
acute coronary events. Individuals in the upper quartile 
of pubertal BMI change was associated with substantially 
increased risk of both early and late acute coronary 
events, compared with the individuals in the other 
3 quartiles, independently of childhood BMI (Table VI in 
the Data Supplement). The association between pubertal 
BMI change and the risk of adult acute coronary events 
was further evaluated using a restricted cubic spline 
approach, confirming a statistically significant nonlinear 
association for both early (Figure IIA in the Data Supplement) 
and late (Figure IIB in the Data Supplement) 
acute coronary events with the most pronounced direct 
association observed for the men in the upper quartile 
of pubertal BMI change. When adjusted for pubertal 

BMI change, childhood BMI evaluated as a continuous 
parameter displayed a modest linear association with 
early but not late risk of acute coronary events (Table III 
in the Data Supplement). 

DISCUSSION 

There is a knowledge gap regarding the association 
between pubertal BMI change and adult coronary atherosclerosis 
as analyzed by computed tomography imaging 
and the risk of adult acute coronary events. In our 
analysis, where we linked data on childhood BMI and 
pubertal BMI change to midlife CAC score, an assessment 
of coronary atherosclerosis, we found that pubertal 
BMI change was directly associated with CAC score, 


Figure 4. Kaplan-Meier curve of survival free of acute coronary events according to overweight status at 8 and 20 y of age in 
37 672 Swedish men in the BEST (BMI Epidemiology Study) Gothenburg cohort. 

The graph shows survival free of acute coronary events according to the following groups of overweight status: normal weight/ 
normal weight=not overweight at 8 or 20 y of age, overweight/normal weight=overweight at 8 but not at 20 y of age, normal weight/ 
overweight=overweight at 20 but not at 8 y of age, overweight/overweight=overweight both at 8 and 20 y of age. Childhood overweight 
at 8 y of age24 was defined as BMI =17.9 kg/m2 while young adult overweight at 20 y of age was defined as BMI =25 kg/m2. The P values 
for comparison between the groups assessed by log-rank and adjusted for multiple testing (3 comparisons) were <0.001 for normal 
weight/overweight and overweight/overweight vs normal weight/normal weight, and not significant for overweight/normal weight vs 
normal weight/normal weight. 

independently of midlife BMI and major cardiovascular 
risk factors. In addition, linking the BEST Gothenburg 
cohort of 37672 individuals to national registers, we 
observed that subjects who developed overweight during 
puberty had increased risk of a first acute coronary event 
and of dying in association with the event. 

The association between BMI during development 
and coronary artery atherosclerosis is not well studied. 
In the Bogalusa Heart Study, atherosclerosis in the coronary 
arteries, assessed as the presence of fatty streaks 
and fibrous plaques at autopsy, was evaluated in a small 
sub-cohort of 93 individuals at age 2 to 39 years.19 The 
authors report a significant correlation between BMI 
and the presence of fatty streaks and fibrous plaques. 
Whether or not there was a correlation specifically with 
BMI during developmental ages such as childhood or 
puberty was not reported. In the Avon Longitudinal Study 
of Parents and Children cohort, individuals with high fat 
mass between 9 and 17 years of age had higher arterial 
stiffness, an early marker of atherosclerosis, in the carotid 
and femoral arteries at age 17.20 However, the association 
between pubertal BMI change and markers of adult 
atherosclerosis in the coronary arteries has not been 
evaluated. Using the BEST Gothenburg cohort, with BMI 
available during both childhood and puberty, linked to the 
SCAPIS cohort with computed tomography analysis of 
the heart, we had the unique opportunity to evaluate the 
association between pubertal BMI change and calcifications 
in the coronary arteries. We, herein, demonstrate 
that pubertal BMI change, but not childhood BMI at age 
8, was directly associated with midlife CAC score. Importantly, 
pubertal BMI change was directly associated with 
CAC score, independent of midlife BMI, demonstrating 
that a large pubertal BMI change contributes information 
beyond that of tracking into a high adult BMI. Two recent 
Mendelian randomization studies demonstrated that the 
associations between BMI in childhood and adult CHD 
and asthma were mainly mediated through a high BMI 
in midlife.7,8 No studies have so far evaluated the associations 
for pubertal BMI change using the Mendelian 
randomization approach, but in the present observation 
study, pubertal BMI change was associated with CAC 
score independent of midlife BMI. The observation that 
pubertal BMI change only explained 14% of the variation 
in midlife BMI supports the notion that pubertal BMI 
change may be an independent risk marker with unique 
information, not captured by midlife BMI. Furthermore, 
the finding that the strength of the association between 
pubertal BMI change and CAC score was not attenuated 
when the cardiovascular risk factors were included 
in the model, indicates that it is unlikely that the observed 
association is mediated to a substantial part via any of 
these 3 risk factors and demonstrate that a high pubertal 
BMI increase is a novel independent risk marker of 
atherosclerosis. These findings support the idea that the 
atherosclerotic process starts already during puberty, 

and that the pubertal period may constitute an important 
window for prevention. 

Some previous studies have evaluated the association 
between one BMI measurement during development or 
young adulthood and adult CHD. In a well-powered study 
on Israeli army personnel, young adult BMI at 17 years of 
age was a significant predictor of adult CHD.11 However, 
since only one BMI measurement (after puberty) was 
available in that study it was not possible to determine the 
relative importance of childhood BMI and pubertal BMI 
change. Thus, while both young adult BMI9–11 and BMI 
during development5,6,21,22 have been shown to associate 
separately with increased risk of CHD, the lack of wellpowered 
studies with BMI measurements available both 
before and directly after puberty has made it difficult to 
determine the independent role of pubertal BMI change 
for the risk of adult acute coronary events. Childhood and 
puberty represent 2 physiologically distinct developmental 
periods, and this notion is supported by our observations 
that childhood BMI and pubertal BMI change only 
correlate marginally and that pubertal BMI change is, 
independently of childhood BMI, a determinant of acute 
coronary events in the present study, and as previously 
reported, of cardiovascular mortality,12 stroke,13 heart failure,
14 and asthma.15 In the present study, we demonstrate 
that individuals with pubertal onset overweight have 
higher risk of acute coronary events, and of death due 
to the acute coronary events, compared with individuals 
that were never overweight. In contrast, individuals with 
childhood overweight with remission during puberty did 
not have an increased risk of acute coronary events compared 
with those that were never overweight. However, a 
direct association was seen for childhood BMI at 8 years 
of age and the risk of early acute coronary events, in 
line with previous findings.5,6,21 In addition, we made the 
important finding that among individuals who suffered 
an acute coronary event, specifically those with pubertal 
onset overweight had an increased risk of death due 
to the acute coronary event, compared with the never 
overweight. These findings demonstrate that excessive 
increase of BMI during puberty increases the risk and 
may increase the severity of adult acute coronary events. 

The finding that overweight during the childhood years 
that is reversed before the age of 20 is not associated 
with a persistent increase in the risk for acute coronary 
events indicates that interventions leading to a healthier 
BMI before reaching adult age may positively alter the 
life course risk of cardiovascular disease for individuals 
with overweight in childhood. 

The potential mechanisms behind the association 
between the pubertal BMI change and CAC score and 
acute coronary events are not known. The observational 
design of the present study precludes causal conclusions 
based on the observed associations, but our findings 
could be useful for hypothesis generation. We 
have previously demonstrated that a large pubertal BMI 

change is associated with more visceral adipose tissue 
in young adult age.23 One may, therefore, speculate 
that pubertal expansion of the visceral fat depot might 
at least partly mediate the observed associations in the 
present study. Based on our findings, we propose that 
the pubertal period might be an important window to 
identify boys with excessive BMI increase during puberty 
for targeted primary prevention to avoid adult coronary 
artery disease. The limitations of the present study 
include that the results may have limited generalizability 
to other ethnicities. As Sweden did not have mandatory 
female military conscription, we were unable to retrieve 
young adult BMI for women, which made it impossible 
for us to determine the associations between the developmental 
BMI parameters and risk of acute coronary 
events in women. Furthermore, the lack of confounding 
control is an important limitation. Data on cardiovascular 
risk factors and confounders such as demographics, 
family income, diet, and physical activity during included 
individuals’ childhood were not available and hence, the 
analyses could not be adjusted for these possible confounders. 
The strengths of the study include that we 
were able to link developmental BMI data to information 
on CAC score, a marker of coronary atherosclerosis, 
midlife BMI, and detailed information on cardiovascular 
risk factors, and to information on coronary artery events 
from high-quality national registers for individuals in the 
same population. 

In conclusion, pubertal BMI change is an independent 
predictor of CAC score and risk of acute coronary 
events in adult men. These findings suggest that excessive 
BMI increase during puberty initiates the coronary 
atherosclerotic process, and thereby increases the risk 
and severity of adult acute coronary events.