Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, or COVID-19, has 
infected at least 500 million people and killed over 6 million. The primary 
cause of death is usually intractable hypoxemia from acute respiratory 
distress syndrome (ARDS) (1). However, some literature
raised the possibility of other causes of hypoxemia:
specifically, right-to-left (R-L) shunts (2). Autopsies
from COVID-19 pneumonia patients also demonstrated
pulmonary capillary deformations (3), and
dual-energy CT images suggested pulmonary vessel
dilatation (4).

A recent study reported a R-L shunt in 83% of adult
ICU patients with severe COVID-19 (5). The authors
concluded this was secondary to increased pulmonary
vascular dilation. However, sample size was small (n =
18), and they relied upon agitated-saline microbubbles
via transcranial Doppler (TCD) of the bilateral middle
cerebral arteries (6). However, they could not rule out
intracardiac disease, as neither transthoracic echocardiography
(TTE) nor transesophageal echocardiography
(TEE) was performed (6). This frequency of
shunt was significantly higher than historical ARDS
controls (5, 7), it raised the possibility that COVID-19
ARDS might be associated with increased R-L shunt.
In contrast, another study reported lower rates of
shunt in COVID-19 ARDS patients: 10% with patent
foramen ovale (PFO) and 20% with detectable transpulmonary
bubble transit (8), more in-line with historical
controls (7, 9). However, numbers were relatively
low (n = 60) and the study used contrast-enhanced
TTE (but not TEE). While an improvement on TCD,
TTE lacks sufficient sensitivity to fully assess the intraatrial
septum (8, 10, 11).

A recent systematic review suggested an association 
between R-L shunts and increased mortality (12). 
Therefore, the purpose of our study was to compare 
COVID-19 ARDS and non-COVID-19 ARDS ICU 
patients for R-L shunt presence, shunt etiology (intrapulmonary/
intracardiac), and associations with mortality. 
We used a comprehensive hypoxemia protocol 
that included contrast-enhanced TTE/TCD and TEE. 

METHODS 

This study was reviewed and fully approved by the 
local institutional review board (University of Alberta 
Research Ethics Board: PRO00104364, approved 
October 20, 2020), with procedures followed in accordance 
with the ethical standards of the responsible 
committee on human experimentation (institutional 
or regional) and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975. 
Waived consent for data was obtained given that TTE, 
TCD, and TEE are all within standard of care for severe 
hypoxemia at our institution (and de-identified 
registry data was available for all patients). Clinical 
assent/consent for TEE was obtained from either the 
patient’s substitute decision-maker and/or attending 
physician. 

Setting and Study Design 

Four Canadian ICUs in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, 
participated in this prospective, observational cohort 
study. All are tertiary care referral centers, caring for 
complex medical, trauma, surgical, oncologic, and 
transplant patients. All sites are equipped with portable 
ultrasound machines (Fujifilm Sonosite, Bothell, 
WA) with probes for TTE, TEE, and TCD. Following a 
point-of-care ultrasound (POCUS) study by the physician, 
images are saved and automatically uploaded to 
the Qpath (Telexy, Maple Ridge, BC, Canada) archiving 
system, along with a report charted from the scanning 
physician. 

We recruited eligible all consecutive ARDS COVID 
and non-COVID patients between November 16, 2020, 
and September 1, 2021, who all received a protocolized 
hypoxemia shunt workup. Patients were included if 
they were diagnosed with ARDS who were receiving 
invasive mechanical ventilation plus COVID-19 pneumonia 
(comparator group) versus ARDS without 
COVID (control group). Patients were excluded if less 
than 18 years old. 

Working Definitions 

We defined COVID-19 infection as having a polymerase 
chain reaction nucleic acid test confirmed by 
healthcare-approved assay (reference). 

We used the 2012 Berlin ARDS definition (13). We 
defined and diagnosed R-L intrapulmonary shunts 
and intracardiac shunts as per the American Society 
of Echocardiography, where intracardiac shunt was 
defined as a positive bubble study usually within 1–2 
cardiac cycles, and evidence of PFO/atrial septal defect 
(ASD) via TTE or TEE with color Doppler (11, 14). An 
intrapulmonary shunt was defined as evidence of positive 
bubble study usually within 4–8 cardiac cycles, 
with no evidence of PFO/ASD on a TTE or TEE with 
color Doppler (11, 14). 

A positive TCD study was defined by detection of 
any microbubbles during insonation of the middle 
cerebral artery with pulse-wave Doppler and injection 
of agitated-saline contrast with and without 
simulated Valsalva (simulating increased intraabdominal 
pressure by pressing on the abdomen 
and then releasing). We did not categorize severity, 
only the binary presence/absence of a R-L shunt by 
TCD (15). 

Hypoxemia Shunt Workup 

We performed an intracardiac and intrapulmonary 
shunt workup for hypoxemia in COVID-19 and non-
COVID ARDS patients. These studies were performed 
within 72 hours of initiation of mechanical ventilation 
and ICU admission and were typically performed in 
under 24 hours. All components of the workup (TTE/ 
TCD/TEE) were performed within the same day. All 
operators and sonographers wore full personal protective 
equipment. The shunt bubble study protocol 
is further outlined in Supplemental Figure 1 (http:// 
links.lww.com/CCM/H312), including full explanations 
of TTE/TCD/TEE protocols. 

All patient investigations adhered to American 
Society of Echocardiography (11, 14) or American 
Society of Neuroimaging standards (15, 16). All studies 
were supervised by board-certified echocardiographers 
or TCD sonographers from critical care/cardiac 
anesthesia/cardiology physicians. We performed 
external validation with over-readers of our TTE/ 
TEE/TCD bubble studies, which allowed us to calculate 
inter-rater reliability (kappa statistic) to examine 
agreement in diagnosis of findings. 

Data Collection 

The Qpath database was queried for all TTE/TCD/ 
TEE images/clips and reports. Demographic and clinical 
characteristic data were collected from registry 
databases within Alberta Health Services (eCritical/ 
data warehouse and clinical analytics system/Data 
Integration, Measurement & Reporting) and included: 
COVID-19 status, age, sex, race/ethnicity, patient casemix 
(medical, surgical, trauma), Acute Physiology 
And Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE) II score 
(17), Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) score (18), 
respiratory mechanics (e.g., tidal volumes [TVs], positive 
end-expiratory pressure [PEEP] static compliance, 
plateau pressures, Pao2/Fio2 [PF] ratio, arterial blood 
gas results [including alveolar-arterial gradient]), 
deadspace calculations (using arterial blood gas Pco2 
compared with end-tidal Co2 from volumetric capnography), 
and type of ventilation at time of bubble 
study, types of interventions during hospital stay (e.g., 
prone positioning, airway-pressure release ventilation, 
pulmonary vasodilators, extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation, renal replacement therapy), vasopressors/
inotropes, steroid use, stress ulcer prophylaxis, 

venous thromboembolism prophylaxis, ventilatorassociated 
pneumonia prophylaxis, sedation, analgesia, 
neuromuscular blockade use, and other baseline 
measures (e.g., vitals signs, laboratory values: complete 
blood count, troponin, d-dimer), where available. All 
laboratories were collected as part of the clinical team’s 
discretion, and we did not require brain natriuretic 
peptide collection as per study protocols. 

The echocardiographic findings collected were: 
date of study, POCUS examination type (TTE or TEE) 
and location, presence/absence of intracardiac versus 
intrapulmonary shunt by bubble study, presence/absence 
of intra-atrial septal defect by color Doppler, 
and all other echocardiographic findings: for example, 
biventricular size and function, valvulopathy, pericardial 
disease, superior or inferior vena caval size, and 
respirophasic changes, etc. Tricuspid annular planar 
systolic excursion (TAPSE) and pulmonary acceleration 
time (PAT) and shunt fractions were not routinely 
measured for all studies due to variations in technically 
challenging patient anatomy and image acquisition 
skills of sonographers. All findings were overread for 
quality assurance (e.g., right ventricular [RV] size and 
dysfunction assessment was performed using eye-ball 
estimation of function; and, the absence of tricuspid 
regurgitation did not exclude the presence of pulmonary 
hypertension but only that there might have been 
insufficient tricuspid regurgitation to quantify the degree 
of pulmonary hypertension), and all study images 
were reviewed by at least two expert echocardiographers 
with National Board of Echocardiography certification 
to calculate inter-rater reliability for shunt 
identification. These POCUS assessors were blinded 
to clinical outcomes during the quality assurance oversight 
process. Treatment teams were not blinded to 
POCUS findings. 

Clinical outcomes were reported through hospital 
discharge and at 90 days post-ICU admission. These 
included: ICU length of stay, hospital length of stay, 
duration of mechanical ventilation, and complications 
related to study procedures and hospitalization 
(Supplemental Appendix 1, http://links.lww.com/ 
CCM/H312). 

Statistical Analysis and Sample Size 

Descriptive statistics were generated for baseline demographic, 
clinical characteristics, echocardiographic 

findings, and clinical outcome variables. Categorical 
data were summarized using frequency and column 
percentage and normal distributed data were described 
using mean and sd. Non-normal distributed data were 
presented as median and interquartile ranges (IQRs). 
Data were compared (where appropriate) using a 
Pearson chi-square test (categorical data), Student t 
test (normal distributed data), and nonparametric 
Kruskal-Wallis test (non-normal distributed data). A 
p value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically 
significant with 95% CIs also reported, if applicable. 
Missing data or lost-to-follow-up was less than 5%, so 
no imputation was required. There were no prespecified 
sensitivity analyses or subgroups. 

Inter-rater reliability for echocardiographic findings 
of shunt (intrapulmonary vs intracardiac) was calculated 
for Cohen’s kappa statistic, where the following interpretations 
were used: less than 0 (poor), 0–0.20 (slight), 
0.21–0.40 (fair), 0.41–0.60 (moderate), 0.61–0.80 (substantial), 
and 0.81–1.00 (almost perfect) (19, 20). 

Univariate logistic regression modeling was used 
to evaluate the association between unadjusted odds 
ratios (ORs) with 95% CIs with mortality (continuous). 
Multivariable logistic regression modeling 
was also used to calculate adjusted ORs, adjusting for 
known variables including baseline demographics 
(age, sex) and clinical characteristics (CCI) and (illness 
severity scores: e.g., APACHE II) to determine if 
the presence of shunt mortality exists after adjustment. 
These variables were prespecified a priori. Given prior 
evidence of lack of association between PF ratios and 
shunt presence (12), this was not a variable used for 
adjustment. 

These statistical analyses were performed using 
Statistical Analysis System Enterprise Guide 7.1 (Cary, 
NC) or Microsoft Excel, Version 14.0.6 (Microsoft 
Corporation, Redmond, WA). All reporting of this observational 
cohort study was made in accordance with 
the Strengthening the Reporting of Observational 
Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) guidelines and 
checklist (Supplemental Appendix 2, http://links.lww. 
com/CCM/H312) (21). 

In order to calculate study power, we used a reported 
frequency of shunts (e.g., PFOs) of approximately 19% 
in severe pneumonia/ARDS and a predicted increase 
in shunt of 15% with cor pulmonale (right-sided heart 
failure) physiology (up to a shunt rate of 34%) (7). Using 
an alpha of 0.05 and power of 0.80, we calculated a 

Figure 1. Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology diagram flowchart for hypoxemia workup assessing 
shunt presence. ARDS = acute respiratory distress syndrome, MRP = most responsible physician, TCD = transcranial Doppler, 
TEE = transesophageal echocardiography, TTE = transthoracic echocardiography. 

minimum total sample size of 212 patients (106 patients 
per group). Considering an approximate attrition rate of 
5%, this would require a minimum of 224 study participants 
for the incident shunt rate in the study. 

RESULTS 

Demographics and Clinical Characteristics 

We enrolled 226 patients. Of these, 182 were COVID19 
positive, and 44 composed the non-COVID control 
group (Fig. 1). Baseline demographics and clinical 
characteristics are presented in Supplemental Table 1 
(http://links.lww.com/CCM/H312). Both groups had 
comparable TVs, plateau pressures, and static compliance 
in keeping with high and equivalent rates of lung 
protective ventilation in both groups. The COVID-19 
arm was associated with significantly higher rates of 
noninvasive positive pressure ventilation and highflow 
nasal cannula oxygen administration (92.9% vs 
77.3%; risk difference [RD], 15.6%; 95% CI, 5.7–25.5; 
p = 0.001) prior to intubation (Supplemental Table 

1, http://links.lww.com/CCM/H312). More patients 
in the COVID-19 arm underwent prone positioning 
(77.5% vs 43.2%; RD, 34.3%; 95% CI, 19.3–49.3; p = 
0.000004) (Supplemental Table 2, http://links.lww. 
com/CCM/H312). Percent positivity of R-L started at 
~27% in the beginning of the study but fell to ~17% by 
the end (Supplemental Fig. 2, http://links.lww.com/ 
CCM/H312). There were two patients with preexisting 
shunts in the non-COVID groups (2/34 patients, 
5.9%), which were later classified in the nonshunt 
group, as they had negative R-L bubble studies and no 
visible shunts on color Doppler (Supplemental Table 1, 
http://links.lww.com/CCM/H312). 

Echocardiographic Findings, R-L Shunts, and 
Inter-Rater Reliability 

Echocardiographic findings and the percentage with a 
R-L shunt are shown in Supplemental Table 3 (http:// 
links.lww.com/CCM/H312). In the COVID-19 group, 
31 of 182 patients (17.0%) had a shunt identified, of 
which 12 were intracardiac (38.7%) and 19 (61.3%) 

were intrapulmonary shunts. In the non-COVID group, 
10 of 44 patients (22.7%) had an identified shunt; of 
which 7 (70.0%) were intracardiac shunts and 3 (30.0%) 
were intrapulmonary. There was no statistically significant 
difference in the overall rate of shunt between the 
COVID-19 and non-COVID groups (17.0% vs 22.7%; 
RD, –5.7%; 95% CI, –18.4 to 7.0; p = 0.38). There was 
a nonsignificant higher proportion of intrapulmonary 
shunts in the COVID-19 group compared with non-
COVID (61.2% vs 30.0%, respectively; RD, 31.2%; 95% 
CI, –4.4% to 66.8%; p = 0.08) (Supplemental Table 3, 
http://links.lww.com/CCM/H312). Inter-rater reliability 
was high for TTE/TCD/TEE shown in Supplemental 
Table 4 (http://links.lww.com/CCM/H312). 

Clinical Outcomes 

Clinical outcomes are summarized in Supplemental 
Table 2 (http://links.lww.com/CCM/H312). For the primary 
outcome, there was higher in-hospital mortality 
among COVID shunt patients compared with no shunt 
(54.8% vs 35.8%; RD, 19.0%; 95% CI, 0.1–37.9; p = 0.05). 
However, this difference was no longer significant at 
90-day mortality (54.8% vs 38.4%; RD, 16.4%; 95% CI, 
–2.6% to 35.4%; p = 0.10). There was no difference in 
either in-hospital (39.0% vs 43.2%; RD, –4.2%; 95% CI, 
–20.3% to 11.9%; p = 0.30) or 90-day mortality (41.2% 
vs 45.5%; RD, –4.1%; 95% CI, –12.2% to 20.4%; p = 0.31) 
between the COVID-19 and non-COVID arms. 

COVID-19 infection was associated with a significantly 
longer median duration of mechanical ventilation 
(15.0 d [IQR, 8.0–25.0 d] vs 9.0 d [IQR, 5.0–17.0 
d]; RD, 7.5 d; 95% CI, 0.5–14.5 d; p = 0.007) compared 
with the control group. There was also a longer median 
ICU length of stay (17.5 d [IQR, 11.0–28.0 d] vs 

12.0 d [IQR, 7.5–20.0 d]; RD, 8.2 d; 95% CI, 1.0–15.4 d; 
p = 0.007). 
There was no measurable increase in complications 
attributable to performing TEE (oropharyngeal/gastrointestinal 
bleeding or pneumomediastinum). There were no 
detected cases of esophageal perforation (Supplemental 
Table 2, http://links.lww.com/CCM/H312). 

Kaplan-Meier Curves and Multivariable Logistic 
Regression Analysis 

Kaplan-Meier curves for 90-day mortality are presented 
in Figure 2. There was a significant difference 
in shunt versus no shunt in COVID patients (p = 0.04) 

(Fig. 2C). The remaining log-rank tests were not significant 
and after adjustment for multiple comparisons. 

The combined regression analysis in the full cohort 
showed no significant difference in 90-day mortality 
based on the presence of any shunt or in the intracardiac 
and intrapulmonary shunt subtypes. The regression 
adjusting for Charlson’s Health Score specifically 
did show a significant increase in 90-day mortality 
in the shunt portion of the overall cohort (OR, 1.28; 
95% CI, 1.09–1.52). No other individual covariable 
adjustments showed a significant signal for increased 
mortality in any group (Supplemental Table 5, http:// 
links.lww.com/CCM/H312). 

DISCUSSION 

In this study, COVID-19 shunt rates were not significantly 
different compared with non-COVID ARDS. 
Our findings align with our recent meta-analysis (12), 
suggesting approximately one in five patients with 
ARDS had a R-L shunt. Although there was no statistical 
significance for intracardiac or intrapulmonary 
shunt types between groups, there was a signal 
of higher intrapulmonary shunts in COVID patients, 
while higher intracardiac shunt rates in non-COVID 
patients, which may have been exacerbated by lower 
lung compliance with higher plateau pressures, leading 
to more intracardiac shunts in non-COVID patients. 
We also found an association between R-L shunts and 
increased hospital mortality, but this was no longer 
significant at 90-day mortality, or after multivariable 
adjustment. 

Given that approximately one-in-five patients with 
ARDS may have a R-L shunt, this study is a reminder 
to clinicians to consider screening patients and, if present, 
to consider targeted therapies. This study also 
highlights that not all R-L shunts are intrapulmonary 
and that different shunts will have different treatment 
implications. Specifically, intrapulmonary shunts are 
most often due to abnormal vasodilation of pulmonary 
vessels. Therefore, treatment focuses on: 1) reducing underlying 
inflammation/infection leading to pulmonary 
vasodilation (e.g., corticosteroids) (22); 2) vigilant PEEP 
titration and ventilator optimization, to prevent over 
dilation of pulmonary vessels, while preventing shunt 
from atelectasis from occurring (23, 24); and 3) avoiding 
pulmonary vasodilators (e.g., epoprostenol, nitric 
oxide, sildenafil) (25, 26). In contrast, intracardiac shunt 
management should lower right-sided heart pressures 

Figure 2. Kaplan-Meier curves. 

to prevent further shunting through an intra-atrial 
septum defect (e.g., PFO or ASD). Treatments include: 

1) pulmonary vasodilators (e.g., inhaled nitric oxide, 
epoprostenol) and/or inodilators (e.g., milrinone, dobutamine) 
through reducing RV afterload and improving 
RV function (23, 27, 28); 2) lowering ventilator settings 
(e.g., PEEP, plateau pressures) (23, 27, 28); 3) closure 
or repair of an intraseptal defects (PFO, ASD) to prevent 
further R-L shunting (23, 27, 28); and 4) diuresis 
to offload RV volume overload (23, 27, 28). Regardless, 
diagnosing shunt in ARDS patients starts with high suspicion 
and prompt diagnosis. 
Guidelines have promoted standardizing ARDS 
management, like using low-TV ventilation (29) and 
proning (30), among other strategies. There has also 
been adoption of higher PEEP in both COVID and 
non-COVID-ARDS. Our study is a reminder that indiscriminate 
use of PEEP or pulmonary vasodilators 
may be harmful in the wrong patient. Future work 

could include: 1) identifying which patients to screen 
for shunt; and 2) potential interventions to reduce 
mortality from shunts. 

This study has its strengths. We confirmed that research 
is still feasible in the midst of a pandemic by 
undertaking the largest study of shunts in COVID-19 
ARDS. We have designed an extensive protocol for 
ICU shunt workup, which was performed by intensivists 
during the pandemic, saving on personal protective 
equipment. We investigated different shunt types, cointerventions, 
and duration of mechanical ventilation 
plus other respiratory adjuncts, which is not routinely 
reported in ARDS literature (12). Our study rein-
forces the safety of intensivist and trainee TEE, given 
that there were no procedural complications (31), and 
our inter-relator scores highlight that ICU echocardiography 
and TCD is feasible and reliable (32, 33). We 
performed both unadjusted and adjusted ORs analysis 
using multivariable logistic regression to account for 

known confounders (e.g., age, illness severity) in keeping 
with STROBE and Newcastle-Ottawa score recommendations 
(21, 34). 

There are several limitations to this study. The 
smaller size of our non-COVID arm, leading to imbalance 
and potential loss of statistical power; however, 
given the higher number of COVID-19 versus non-
COVID patients, this shunt data is representative of 
the ICU population at the time. Patient factors such as 
obesity and poor windows affected our ability to perform 
shunt fractions, even with TEE. The presence of 
shunts in ARDS may be dynamic, and whereby timing 
of investigations (without repeat studies performed) 
may influence shunt frequency. Shunt frequency also 
may have been affected by more evidence for available 
treatments across subsequent waves during the 
pandemic. Finally, the relatively low rate of RV dysfunction 
and pulmonary hypertension is intriguing 
(although not formally measured with TAPSE or PAT) 
and may be because these patients underwent ultrasonographic 
assessments early in their course on the 
ventilator. 

CONCLUSIONS 

There was no evidence of increased R-L shunt rates 
in COVID-19 compared with non-COVID and historical 
controls. R-L shunt presence was associated 
with increased in-hospital mortality for COVID-19 
patients, but this did not persist for 90-day mortality 
or after adjusting using logistic regression.