Introduction

Emerging adulthood is a formative developmental 
period, hallmarked by independence and substantial 
changes in living situation and lifestyle behaviors. 
As a group, incoming college students living 
in on-campus dormitories typify these factors. 
Changes in lifestyle behaviors are particularly evident 
for body weight changes during the first year 
as unhealthy eating behaviors and low levels of 
physical activity contribute to approximately 70% 
of student weight gain during the freshman year
(~1–2 kg), often typified as excess weight gain.1,2 
Such changes are problematic for health outcomes 
as young individuals with overweight and obesity 
are more likely to remain with overweight or obesity 
into adulthood.3

Differences in the assemblage of gut microbial 
communities have been broadly observed between 
individuals with obese and lean body types across 
different age ranges, including children and 
adolescents.4,5 These compositional differences 
remain significantly distinct even when controlling 
for constitutional factors like genetics.6 The community 
landscape of the gut microbiome tracks 
with a multitude of health features, forming a bi- 
directional relationship with the host. Notable 
moderating factors that drive this relationship 
include diet, physical activity, weight status, and 
age.7–10 Therefore, understanding the relationship 
between the complex community of gut microbes 
and health over the lifespan is important for 
improving outcomes, with a shifting focus from 
cross-sectional to longitudinal investigations. 
Results from animal models suggest that microbes 
influence weight gain, but this relationship in 
humans remains unclear.11 Indeed, clinical study 
challenges persist and host–microbiome relationships 
in humans have been difficult to examine in 
rigorous investigations.12,13 For instance, variance 
at the individual level (e.g., baseline microbiome 
composition and functional capacity) greatly confounds 
the interpretation of intervention or environmental 
exposure outcomes analyses across study 
populations.14–16 Differences in host features and 
gut microbial structure and function are important 
considerations, particularly when exploring the 
underpinnings of divergent health trajectories.

In late-stage adolescence as individuals emerge 
into adulthood, many lifestyle factors that influence 
excess body weight formalize and have important 
bearing on health outcomes throughout an 
individual’s life. Age has been identified as an 
important factor in gut microbiome diversity, 
with some reports demonstrating statistically significant 
differences between adolescents and 
adults.17,18 Animal studies suggest that adolescents 
have a malleable microbiome composition that 
responds more effectively than adults to lifestyle 
interventions and results in lasting changes in 
body composition.19 However, the implications of 
the relationship between age and community 
dynamics in the human gut microbiome on the 
health of adolescents remain relatively 
unchartered.

Limited longitudinal data are available in which 
shifts in the gut microbiome in free-living populations 
can be examined during periods of expected 
weight gain.20–22 Such data are particularly sparse 
in adolescent populations, as their microbiome 
composition has largely been considered to be 
similar to that observed in adults.17,23 Moreover, 
aggregation of larger, longitudinal sample sets with 
high dimensionality and variable taxonomic abundances 
has presented substantial barriers in translating 
microbial data to meaningful health state 
insight. Therefore, in this exploratory study, we 
aimed to evaluate changes in body weight over 
the freshman year of college in relation to gut 
microbiome diversity, keystone taxa, and variability. 
In addition, we sought to explore potential 
drivers of latent community structure by constructing 
truncated fractional classification, considering 
our sizable and variable sample set. The study 
population was a cohort of incoming freshman 
college students living in residence halls on campus, 
grouped for microbiome analysis by weight 
gain, weight loss, and weight stable classification 
based on their longitudinal body weight change 
category. We hypothesized that the assessed microbial 
markers would distinctly track with each of the 
three weight change classifications. Findings provide 
insight into the complex relationship between 
changes in the gut microbiome community and 
weight in adolescents.

Results

Participant characteristics

This study included 139 participants from a larger 
investigation that has been described previously.24–26 
Briefly, this longitudinal study aimed to understand 
the impacts of social interactions, friends and friendship 
networks on nutrition, physical activity, and 
weight gain during the transition to college life. In 
the present study, we retained individuals who provided 
at least two stool samples (sample n = 372) at 
any time throughout the study duration to support 
this longitudinal analysis. Baseline participant 

characteristics are described in Table 1 and an overview 
of the study is displayed in Figure 1a. The 
median (IQR) number of days between the first and 
last fecal sample collection was 216 (146.5, 223) days. 
At baseline, a majority (n = 91, 65.5%) of participants 
were classified as having a body mass index (BMI) 
within the normal or underweight category (<25 kg/ 
m2), though a substantial number of participants (n 
= 48, 34.5%) were classified as overweight or obese 
(BMI =25 kg/m2). Thus, to account for variability in 
initial body mass, we controlled for baseline BMI. 
Participants were distributed into three weight 
change clusters that included weight gain (WG; n = 
67, 48.2%), weight loss (WL; n = 13, 9.4%), and 
weight maintenance (WM; n = 59, 42.4%). 
Specifically, WG, WL, and WM were defined as 
a gain of >3% of baseline weight, a loss of >3% body 
weight, and less than or equal to ± 3%, respectively. 
This classification was based on expert consensus 
recommending that weight maintenance be considered 
a weight change of ±3% of starting body weight, 
small weight fluctuations between ±3–5% weight 
change, and clinically relevant weight change at = ± 
5% change from baseline.27 Experts recommend that 
a percentage weight change is preferred over an 
absolute weight change as it better accounts for baseline 
body size.27

No significant differences between weight 
change classification at baseline were detected for 
age, body weight, waist circumference, waist/hip 
ratio, or BMI (analysis of variance [ANOVA] 
tests, P = .232); nor for self-reported lifestyle behaviors, 
including moderate to vigorous physical 
activity (MVPA), screen time, depression, sleep, 
and dietary factors (Kruskal–Wallis tests, 
P = .090; Supplemental Table S1). In addition, the 
median number of days between the first and last 
sample collection was not significantly different by 
weight classification (Kruskal–Wallis test, P 
= .427). To better understand the relationships 
between anthropometric, dietary, and lifestyle factors 
at baseline, we conducted association analyses 
(total of 91 correlations). Of note, MVPA positively 
correlated with fruit and vegetable intake 
(Spearman’s rho = 0.466, P.adj = 7.69e-8), while 
weekly alcohol intake was negatively correlated 
with sleep (Spearman’s rho = -0.221, P.adj = 
0.039) and positively correlated with added sugar 
intake (Spearman’s rho = 0.219, P.adj = 0.037). 
Further, red and processed meat intake was positively 
associated with added sugar intake 
(Spearman’s rho = 0.323, P.adj = 0.006). The mean 
daily consumption of dietary fiber for males (n = 
42) and females (n = 97) was 18.69 ± 4.93 g/d and 
14.73 ± 3.18 g/d, respectively, which fell below the 
Adequate Intake for both males (38 g/d) and 
females (25–26 g/d) per the Dietary Guidelines for 
Americans.28

Change in body weight (. post- vs. pre-body 
weight) was significant by weight classification 
Table 1. Baseline demographic and anthropometric characteristics of study participants.

CharacteristicTotal (n = 139)WG (n = 67)WL (n = 13)WM (n = 59)
Age (years)18.6 ± 0.718.6 ± 0.718.5 ± 0.318.6 ± 0.6Sex, % (n)
Male30.2 (42)29.9 (20)38.5 (5)28.8 (17)
Female69.8 (97)70.1 (47)61.5 (8)71.2 (42)
Race/ethnicity % (n)
White42.4 (59)47.8 (32)23.1 (3)40.7 (24)
Black12.9 (18)13.4 (9)7.7 (1)13.6 (8)
Hispanic25.9 (36)25.4 (17)23.1 (3)27.1 (16)
Other18.7 (26)13.4 (9)46.2 (6)18.6 (11)
Height (cm)167.1 ± 10.2168.9 ± 10.2168.5 ± 7.8166.0 ± 10.9Weight (kg)68.9 ± 16.968.3 ± 16.571.8 ± 15.569.1 ± 17.9Waist circumference (cm)81.5 ± 13.180.2 ± 13.384.6 ± 12.782.2 ± 12.9Waist/hip ratio0.82 ± 0.070.81 ± 0.070.84 ± 0.080.83 ± 0.07BMI (kg/m2)24.5 ± 4.924.1 ± 5.125.1 ± 4.524.8 ± 4.8BMI Categories (kg/m2), % (n)
<18.5 kg/m24.3 (6)4.5 (3)7.7 (1)3.4 (2)
18.5–24.9 kg/m261.2 (85)64.2 (43)46.2 (6)61.0 (36)
25–29.9 kg/m223.7 (33)20.9 (14)30.8 (4)25.4 (15)
=30 kg/m210.8 (15)10.4 (7)15.4 (2)10.2 (6)
BMI Dichotomized, % (n)
Not overweight/obese65.5 (91)68.7 (46)53.9 (7)64.4 (38)
Overweight/obese34.5 (48)31.3 (21)46.1 (6)35.6 (21)
Data displayed as mean ± SD, unless stated otherwise. Abbreviations: WG, weight gain (gain of >3% of baseline weight); WL, 
weight loss (loss of >3% body weight); WM, weight maintenance (less than or equal to ±3% weight change).

(ANOVA, P = 0.006), with Bonferroni post-hoc 
comparisons showing significant distinction for 
all three categories (P = .030; Figure 1b). 
Participants in the WG category gained an average 
of 6.6% over their initial body weight (+4.59 ± 2.61 
kg: Supplemental Table S2), with the majority gaining 
over 5% (~70%, n = 45) and eight individuals 
gaining over 10%. In comparison, the WL group 
lost 7.1% of their initial body weight (-5.02 ± 2.34 
kg), with three individuals losing more than 10% of 
their baseline body weight. Participants in the WM 
category maintained a relatively stable body weight, 
with an overall average weight change of ~0.8% 
(0.51 ± 1.16 kg). Relatedly, change in waist circumference 
and waist/hip ratio was significant by group 
(ANOVA tests, P < .001 & P = .010, respectfully). 
Bonferroni post-hoc comparisons revealed statistically 
significant waist circumference differences 
over the study period for WG participants (+5.44 
± 6.67%) compared to the participants in the WL 
and WM groups (-4.44 ± 5.06% & -0.01 ± 5.39%, 
respectively; P = .022). A similar pattern was 
observed for waist/hip ratio (P = .033) for participants 
with WG (+2.91 ± 6.03%), when compared to 
participants with WL (-1.04 ± 5.21%), and participants 
with WM (+0.26 ± 5.55%). Partial correlation 
Figure 1. (a) Overview of study design. Participants that experienced weight gain (WG), weight loss (WL), or weight maintenance (WM) 
over the sampling period were assessed as discrete categories. (b) Change in body weight by weight change category. (c) Pearson’s 
partial correlation analysis between change in body weight and waist circumference. (d) Difference for change in fiber, whole grain 
(WHGR), fruit and vegetable (F+V), dairy, added sugar, or alcohol intake between WG, WL, and WM participants.

analysis controlling for baseline BMI, sex, and individual 
participant revealed a significant positive 
association between overall change in body weight 
and waist circumference (Pearson’s R = 0.494, P = 
9.468e-10; Figure 1c) and, to a lesser degree, overall 
change in body weight and waist/hip ratio 
(Pearson’s R = 0.203, P = 0.018).

Of note, there were no significant differences 
between the groups for change in depression 
(Kruskal-Wallis, P = .656) or moderate-to- 
vigorous physical activity (MVPA; ANOVA, 
P = .254), with participants maintaining relatively 
stable self-reported depression scores and physical 
activity relative to baseline values 
(Supplemental Table S3). Moreover, there were 
no significant differences between weight categories 
for change in nightly sleep hours (Kruskal- 
Wallis, P = 0.481). Finally, no statistically significant 
differences were detected for dietary factors 
over the study period between weight classifications 
(Kruskal–Wallis tests, P = .209; Figure 1d; 
Supplemental Table S3).

Longitudinal shift in microbial diversity displayed 
individualization for each weight change trajectory

To evaluate whether weight change over the sampling 
period was associated with shifts in the gut 
microbiome, we first calculated observed amplicon 
sequence variants (ASVs) and Faith’s Phylogenetic 
Diversity (PD) of the 139 participants at their first 
and last fecal sample collection. Employing linear- 
mixed effect (LME) modeling, observed ASVs and 
Faith’s PD of microbial taxa varied significantly by 
group (LME, P = 0.050); however, there was no 
significant difference between the three weight 
change categories after multiple test correction (P. 
adj = 0.087; Figure 2a,b). There were also no significant 
interaction effects of time and weight classification 
for either alpha diversity metric (LME, 
P = .169). To explore whether participant’s initial 
microbial diversity was associated with shifts in 
body weight, we constructed multiple regression 
models regressing change in body weight (post – 
pre-body weight) by baseline alpha diversity, controlling 
for BMI, sex, and participant. Change in 
body weight was not significantly associated with 
the observed ASVs or Faith’s PD (R2 = 0.019, P = 
.246), suggesting that initial alpha diversity was not 
a potential predictive factor for body weight 
change.

Despite the generally non-significant differences 
between weight classification groups by alpha diversity, 
unweighted and weighted UniFrac beta diversity 
metrics shifted significantly over time 
(accounting for all time points). Both distances 
were assessed to account for non-dominant (presence/
absence: unweighted UniFac) and dominant 
(weighted by abundance: weighted UniFrac) 
microbes and displayed a low correlation to warrant 
inclusion of both metrics (Mantel test, R = 0.299, P 
< 2.2e-16; Supplemental Figure S1). Assessing 
unweighted and weighted UniFrac distances, permutational 
analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) 
revealed that most variation in community composition 
was explained by the individual participants 
(R2 = 0.605, P.adj = .002; Supplemental Tables S4 & 
S5). Composition also shifted significantly by weight 
change category over the duration of the study for 
weighted UniFrac, though this explained much less 
variation (interaction effect, R2 = 0.011, P.adj = 
0.003) and was not significantly associated with 
unweighted UniFrac (interaction effect, R2 = 0.005, 
P.adj = .075). In addition, we calculated intra- 
participant distances between sequential stool collections 
and compared these between groups 
accounting for baseline BMI, sex, and the individual 
(as a random effect). Both unweighted and weighted 
UniFrac intra-participant distances decreased after 
the first pairwise comparison (LME, P-adj =1.2e-4) 
but did not differ by weight change category (P.adj = 
.244; Figure 2c,d). Inter-individual distances were 
similarly not significant by group (P.adj = .549; 
Supplemental Figure S2A-B), though were greater 
than intra-individual weighted UniFrac distances 
(+41.31% ± 22.53%, P < 2.2e-16) (Figure 2e), confirming 
that the gut microbiome is individualized 
as previously reported over a similar timeframe29. 
Indeed, individual effects within weight change categories 
accounted for greater variation over time for 
both distance matrices (PERMANOVA, R2 = 0.257, 
P.adj = .002). At the genus level, microbial shifts 
across individuals in all three weight change categories 
were also apparent by visualizing the time 
change of the first principal coordinates axis 
(Figure 2f,h; Supplemental Figure S3A-C). We 
examined the linear coefficients of PERMANOVA 
models using weighted UniFrac distances to assess 

taxonomic underpinnings of these shifts by weight 
change trajectories and dominant influences at the 
genus level. Sources of variation in WG community 
composition over time included positive contributions 
from notable taxa such as Bacteroides, Blautia, 
Bifidobacterium, and negative contributions from 
Prevotella and Faecalibacterium (Figure 2i). In contrast, 
Prevotella and Faecalibacterium were positive 
contributors and Bifidobacterium was a negative 
contributor for the WL and WM microbiomes, 

Figure 2. Gut microbiome diversity and community structure of freshman college students categorized by weight gain (WG), weight 
loss (WL), or weight maintenance (WM) change trajectories over the academic year. Alpha diversity, measured by (a) observed ASVs 
and (b) Faith’s PD. (c) Unweighted UniFrac and (d) weighted UniFrac distances within individuals (intra-individual) were calculated for 
the first (. first and second samples) and second (. first and third samples) distances. Median ±95% confidence intervals displayed in 
black. (e) Boxplots of the intra- and inter-individual weighted UniFrac distances for the 139 participants. Shifts in GM community at the 
genus level were observed across individuals on the first principal coordinate over the academic year of (f) WG participants, (g) WL 
participants, and (h) WM participants (weighted UniFrac). Each series of connected points represents a single individual in the study 
with the number representing the time point of the study in months. Model coefficients of the PERMANOVA analysis (model: Genus ~ 
weight category × time) of weighted UniFrac distances for the (i) WG participants, (j) WL participants, and (k) WM participants 
displayed distinction and similarity. Genera with high coefficients (positive or negative) were visualized to distinguish the taxonomic 
drivers of the microbiome community over time between the three weight change trajectories. Only the top 10 genera are shown. In 
boxplots, the median is represented by the center line with the box representing the 1st and 3rd quartiles, whiskers extend 1.5× the 
interquartile range.


though, as with WG category, Bacteroides was dominant 
(Figures 2j,k).

The ratio of Prevotella/Bacteroidetes did not 
significantly change across the WG, WL, and WM 
microbiomes

Consistent with the genera that contributed to variation 
in beta diversity over time, stool samples 
from participants at baseline were dominated by 
Bacteroides (mean relative abundance: WG, 16.9% 
± 13.5% SD; WL, 13.9% ± 15.7%; WM, 18.2% ± 
10.8%), Blautia (WG, 11.9% ± 7.6%; WL, 9.2% ± 
6.3%; WM, 11.8% ± 7.5%), Faecalibacterium 
(WG, 10.4% ± 9.4%; WL, 12.5% ± 11.6%; WM, 
7.3% ± 6.0%), and Bifidobacterium (WG, 9.0% ± 
9.1%; WL, 7.9% ± 8.6%; WM, 10.3% ± 9.8%; 
Figure 3a). Notably, Prevotella was much more 
disparate between groups with participants, with 
WL displaying a greater abundance (WG, 2.6% ± 
8.7%; WL, 10.2% ± 17.3%; WM, 3.6% ± 13.1%), 
consistent with the driving taxa in beta diversity 
shifts in this weight classification. The broad coverage 
of Bacteroides and sparse (though pronounced, 
where occupant) abundance of Prevotella was 
apparent and selected for further analysis due to 
relevance of these two genera in weight change30 
and long-term diet.31 Of the participant’s first stool 
collection, Bacteroides displayed a left-skewed 
abundance pattern and of all genera had the lowest 
evidence of multimodality via prediction strength 
index (PSI) (0.23). Conversely, Prevotella had moderate 
support for bimodality (PSI = 0.71), supporting 
that this microbe was much less abundant in 
the gut microbiome across individuals. Calculating 
the ratio between these taxa (see Materials and 
Methods), we did not observe significant effects 
for time or interaction of time and weight change 
category (LME, P = .131; Figure 3b). However, 
there was a significant effect of weight change category 
(LME, P = 0.033), with multiple comparison 
testing revealing a nearly significant difference 
between participants with WL and WM (P.adj = 
0.050).

To better understand the stability of these genera 
and whether they shifted to an alternative state over 
the sampling period, we performed calculations of 
multimodality based on bootstrapped potential 
analyses, as previously described.32 Referred to as 
the ‘tipping point’ (TP), this analysis estimates the 
intermediate unstable region where such shifts may 
occur. Participants that intersected the calculated 
threshold for Prevotella (TP = 0.013) and 
Bacteroides (TP = 0.002) displayed significant 
increased temporal deviation compared to participants 
that did not (Wilcoxon rank sum test, P = 
2.665e-15 and P = 0.003, respectfully; Figure 3c,d). 
These results are suggestive of an avoidance of 
temporal stability at the intermediate abundance 
range (low vs. high) and a preference for either 
a Bacteroides- or Prevotella-dominated state. This 
was also apparent by the negative correlation 
between these two genera accounting for all samples 
(Spearman’s rho = -0.213, P = 3.5e-5).

Adapting a longitudinal and continuous analytical 
approach inspired by Levy and colleagues,33 
we examined the potential for individuals in the 
three weight change categories to shift between 
community types (i.e., Bacteroides- vs Prevotella- 
dominated). Representing potential codominance 
between Prevotella and Bacteroides, the intermediate 
space in the middle of each ternary plot was 
generally empty (Figure 3e). Visually, there was an 
apparent curvature of individual trajectories that 
shifted along a Prevotella- or Bacteroides- 
dominated gut microbiome, with few transitions 
between these states. Polynomial regression models 
constructed for participants with WG, WL, and 
WM all accurately mapped to this curvature, 
accounting for =81.8% of the total variance.

Intra- and inter-participant taxonomic variation 
between weight change trajectories

To assess the intra- and inter-participant microbial 
abundance variation, we aggregated ASV reads to 
the genus level for samples from all time points (n 
= 372) after filtering out rare taxa and performing 
a center log-ratio (CLR) transformation on relative 
abundance values. As described in the Methods 
section, the resultant 69 features were then passed 
independently through linear-mixed effect models 
(LMM) for all samples and then by WG, WL, and 
WM status with participant as a random variable. 
As described recently by Olsson and colleagues 
(2022), intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) 

Figure 3. (a) The relative abundance (%) of bacterial genera in first-year college students’ gut microbiome samples. Each vertical bar 
represents a separate stool sample taken at the beginning of the study period. Samples are categorized by weight gain trajectory over 
the academic year (weight gain [WG], weight loss [WL], and weight maintenance [WM]) and are ordered according to the abundance 
of Bacteroides. Samples from 139 individuals in total: WG = 67, WL = 13, and WM = 59, respectively. The top 20 genera are displayed 
with the remaining taxa collapsed into the category “other”. (b) Log10 ratio of Prevotella-to-Bacteroides displayed a significant effect of 
weight change category (linear-mixed effects model, P = .033). In boxplots, the median is represented by the center line with the box 
representing the 1st and 3rd quartiles, whiskers extend 1.5× the interquartile range with outliers individually plotted. Temporal 
variation of (c) Prevotella and (d) Bacteroides represented by horizontal lines (CLR abundance range) over the study duration for each 
participant. Bold lines indicate potential state-shift by intersecting the estimated tipping point (red dashed line). (e) Ternary plots for 
WG, WL, and WM participants depicting the relationship between Prevotella (dominate at the right vertex), Bacteroides (dominate at 
the left vertex), and the other genera (other = 1 – (Prevotella – Bacteroides); dominate at the top vertex). Curvature of transitions within 
and between Prevotella- and Bacteroides-dominated regions is denoted by a polynomial regression line (red) which accounted for the 
majority of explained variance (WG = 81.8%, WL = 88.5%, WM = 89.9%).

were calculated from the intra- and inter- 
individual variances extracted from each LMM.29 
The median ICC of all samples was 0.59 (IQR = 
0.24), demonstrating the variation between individuals 
was greater than the variation within individuals. 
However, 20 taxa had an ICC = 0.50, 
indicating greater variation within participants 
(Figure 4a). Notable features with the lowest ICC 
included Prevotella, Bifidobacterium, 
Ruminococcus gnavus, Collinsella, and Barnesiella 
(ICC = 0.381; Supplemental Table S6). While many 
of these taxa displayed a non-trivial relative abundance 
(i.e., =1%), there was no significant correlation 
between CLR relative abundance and ICC 
(Spearman’s rho = -0.122, P = .316). Comparing 
the ICC between the three weight change categories, 
participants with WL had a significantly 
greater overall value compared to participants 
with WG (Wilcoxon rank sum test, P= .023; 
Figure 4b), suggestive of increased taxonomic stability 
within individuals while displaying greater 
distinction between individuals. No significant differences 
were detected comparing participants with 
WG to WM or WL to WM (P = .230). Examining 
the ICC for each genus of participants with WL, 
notably high values (ICC = 0.80) were apparent for 
Akkermansia, Butyricicoccus, Dorea, DTU089, 
Eubacterium eligens group, Eubacterium hallii 
group, Holdemanella, Incertae Sedis, Lachnospira, 
Lachnospiraceae UCG 004, Marvinbryantia, 
Ruminococcus torques group, and Sellimonas 
(Figure 4c; Supplemental Table S7). In comparison, 
participants with WG had lower values (ICC = 
0.50) for notable features such as Anaerostipes, 
Bacteroides, Faecalibacterium, Prevotella, and 
Ruminococcus gauvreauii group compared to participants 
with WL and WM indicating greater 
within-participant variability. The total variance 
in abundance was not significantly correlated with 
genus CLR relative abundance (Spearman’s rho = 
0.124, P = 0.308). Moreover, there was no significant 
difference in total variance between weight 
change categories (Wilcoxon rank sum test, P = 
.330). Of note, the genera that had the greatest 
variation (i.e., the least stable) were similar between 
weight trajectories. These included the outliers 
(+1.5 IQR) Parasutterella and CAG 352 shared 
across all three weight categories, and an unclassified 
Ruminococcaceae genus and Bifidobacterium 
for participants with WG and WM (Figure 4d).

Latent community types associate with weight 
change trajectories and lifestyle factors

We derived the community-type likelihood of all 
individual samples at the genus level utilizing latent 
Dirichlet allocation (LDA), an unsupervised 
machine learning approach that allows fractional 
membership based on the probability of assignment 
across community types (as opposed to 
exclusive assignment).34 First, to assess the predictive 
potential of community type in weight change, 
we specified 30 latent community types based on 
model fit for 160 genera (comprised of 1,169 ASVs) 
(Supplemental Figure S4). Hierarchical cluster analysis 
revealed six groupings (Figure 5a), with apparent 
separation for community types dominated by 
Bacteroidetes (Cluster 4; Type 19), 
Faecalibacterium (Cluster 5; Type 30), 
Bifidobacterium (Cluster 6; Type 4), and, to 
a lesser extent, Prevotella (Cluster 2; Type 28) 
(Figure 5b). Clusters 1 and 3 contained 19 and 7 
community types, respectfully, and displayed 
a greater degree of shared taxa contributions for 
each type. For example, the top five genera for 
community type 18 within cluster 1, were 
Alistipes, Bacteroides, Clostridia UCG 014, 
Eubacterium siraeu, and Faecalibacterium. 
Assignment probability for each of these taxa was 
within the range of 10–20%. Similar community 
types with more varied taxa contributions included 
types 2, 8, 10, 11, 14, 15, 17, 20, 21, 22, 25, and 26.

The per-sample-per-community type probabilities 
for the first microbiome samples were extracted for 
each weight change classification controlling for sex 
and baseline BMI using Dirichlet regression models. 
This statistical approach was indicated as we assessed 
multiple predictive variables with outcome variables 
as the 30 compositional community types (i.e., values 
across the subgroups add up to 1 for each observation). 
Comparing per-community-feature- 
probabilities across weight change categories at 

Figure 4. Variation of the gut microbiome at the genus level. (a) Relationship between the intra-individual and inter-individual 
variations of genera for all samples. Dots colored by intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) and sized according to the center log-ratio 
(CLR) relative abundance. Genera with an ICC = 0.50 are labeled by name. (b) Boxplots of the ICC for each genus within weight gain 
(WG), weight loss (WL), or weight maintenance (WM) participants (Wilcoxon rank sum test, *P = .023). (c) Heatmap of the ICC for each 
genus by weight change trajectory. (d) Total variance (intra-individual + inter-individual variance) of each genus for WG, WL, and WM 
participants, plotted against the CLR relative abundance. Outliers for each group are labeled by name. For boxplots, the median is 
represented by the center line with the box representing the 1st and 3rd quartiles, whiskers extend 1.5× the interquartile range. 
Features with an asterisk are listed at the family as the genus was unclassified.

baseline, type 12 (dominated by Oscillospiraceae 
UCG-002), 22 (dominated by Lachnospiraceae 
NK4A13), 28 (dominated by Prevotella), and 30 
(dominated by Faecalibacterium) had a greater 
likelihood of occurrence in participants with WL, 
whereas type 19 (dominated by Bacteroides) had 
a greater likelihood of occurrence in participants 
with WG and WM (P.adj =0.041; Supplemental 
Figure 5. (a) Dendrogram of the six hierarchical clusters of community types from participants’ baseline sample. (b) Plot of the six 
hierarchical clusters of community types from participant’s baseline sample. Each cluster is denoted by a different color and the 
numbered nodes represent the latent community types. Ellipses for clusters 1 and 3 are 95% confidence intervals. The composition of 
each of the 30 community types are displayed in Supplemental Figure S4. Ward’s minimum variance method was used for hierarchical 
clustering. (c) Boxplots of the assigned probability per microbiota community type are organized and colored per the six clusters at the 
top. Below a dot plot illustrates the associations derived from Dirichlet regression models between the 30 latent community types and 
anthropometric, behavioral, and dietary factors. Each circle represents a separate association with the size indicating the significance (- 
log10 (P-values)) and the color the effect size (hue) with its direction (red: positive; blue: negative). Asterisks within a circle denote 
a significance after adjustment with the Benjamini–Hochberg method, *P.Adj < .05, ** P.Adj < .01, *** P.Adj < .001. Abbreviations: BW, 
body weight; BMI, body mass index; F+V, fruit and vegetable intake; R+P meat, red and processed meat.

Figure S5). We next considered an unbiased assessment, 
disregarding weight trajectory assignment (e.g., 
WG, WL, and WM), of the samples collected after 
baseline might demonstrate unappreciated community 
patterns. Using GM samples from the second and 
third longitudinal collection, we assessed anthropometric 
(i.e., change in percent body weight, waist 
circumference, and BMI), behavioral (MVPA, depression, 
and sleep), and dietary (i.e., intake of fiber, 
whole-grains, fruit and vegetables, dairy, added 
sugar, red and processed meat, and alcohol) factors 
with multivariate-adjusted Dirichlet regression models, 
controlled for sex and baseline BMI. After multiple 
testing correction, 12 significant associations with 
microbial community type were detected 
(Figure 5c). Alcohol intake (number of weekly drinks) 
was the most frequent, statistically significant correlate 
to community type (i.e., six significant associations) 
and, to a lesser extent, waist, sleep, and added 
sugar and fruit and vegetable intake (i.e., =2 significant 
associations; P.adj = .027; Table 2). Waist circumference 
displayed the greatest effect size (beta- 
coefficient), with positive values from community 
types 19 (dominated by Bacteroides) and 29 (dominated 
by Blautia). In addition, sleep was negatively 
correlated with type 19 (P.Adj = 1.81e-04). Notably, 
community type 4 (dominated by Bifidobacterium) 
was positively associated with alcohol and sugar 
intake (P.Adj =.019) and negatively associated with 
fiber intake (P.Adj = .035).

Discussion

To our knowledge, this is the first longitudinal 
study to observe a statistically significant 
relationship between weight change and the structure 
of the gut microbiome in dormitory-dwelling 
emerging adults during the first year of college. The 
average weight change of participants was +2.6% 
(+1.8 kg), with almost half of the participants gaining 
weight over the course of their first year. As 
a proxy for body composition, weight gain was 
significantly associated with waist circumference, 
indicating a likely increase in body fat.35 Notably, 
the type of weight change was associated with different 
structural shifts within the community of gut 
microbes and displayed distinct variability in select 
taxa in our adolescent population. However, in 
contrast to our original hypothesis, we did not 
observe an overall distinct tracking of gut microbiome 
diversity, keystone taxa, and variability in 
latent structure with each of the three weight 
change classifications.

As reported previously by Olsson et al. (2022), 
we observed greater overall inter-individual variation 
in dissimilarity and taxonomic composition 
in the gut microbiome.29 In agreement with 
Olsson and colleagues, we also noted that differences 
within individuals over time can be quite 
variable and may pose a significant source of 
confounding when examining health outcomes. 
However, in comparison to their older population 
(50–65 years) living in a stable situation, our 
participants underwent a disruptive life change 
transitioning into independent living on 
a college campus. Core genera detected in their 
study such as Prevotella and Bifidobacterium displayed 
a much greater ICC in comparison to our 
results. This discrepancy may have been due to 
the environmental pressures and significant

Table 2. Significant community-type associations with anthropometric, behavioral, and 
dietary factors of all participant samples taken after the baseline collection.

FactorCommunityEffect SizeP-ValueP.AdjAlcoholType 190.2561.16e-124.54e-10AlcoholType 240.2448.79e-091.71e-06Waist CircumferenceType 190.6022.86e-073.71e-05AlcoholType 40.2918.96e-078.74e-05AlcoholType 70.2131.57e-061.22e-04AlcoholType 300.1781.91e-061.24e-04SleepType 19-0.1593.25e-061.81e-04Waist CircumferenceType 290.4103.29e-04.016Added SugarType 40.2234.76e-04.019AlcoholType 150.1914.56e-04.019F+VType 15-0.2087.85e-04.028FiberType 4-0.217.001.035Data ordered and displayed by P.Adj value (descending). Effect sizes are beta-coefficients derived from 
multivariate-adjusted Dirichlet regression models, controlled for sex and baseline BMI. Abbreviations: F 
+V, fruit and vegetable intake; P.Adj, adjusted P-value using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure.


changes in anthropometric outcomes we noted in 
our sample. Moreover, Prevotella was relatively 
sparse in our samples which may have skewed 
the variation we observed in relation to other 
taxa. Others, such as the most prevalent genus, 
Bacteroides, displayed a greater degree of stability. 
In addition, our results align with the high 
between-person differences for abundance of 
Akkermansia from both longitudinal and cross- 
sectional research.29,36 Such inter-person variability 
in select microbes like Prevotella, Bacteroides, 
and Akkermansia are important considerations in 
the context of body weight control and, when 
accounted for in an intervention setting, may 
improve the detection of significant outcome 
changes.30,37–39

Interestingly, weight change was not significantly 
related to microbial richness or phylogenetic 
diversity (alpha diversity) between weight change 
categories. Moreover, baseline alpha diversity was 
not predictive of weight change. Together, these 
findings demonstrate that alpha diversity did not 
have a significant influence on body weight change 
over the course of the study. Few clinical studies 
have evaluated changes in microbial diversity in 
relation to weight change over time which makes 
comparison to other studies difficult, especially in 
adolescent or youth populations. Recently, a meta- 
analysis assessing microbiome-related metrics 
reported increased alpha diversity levels, pooling 
47 trials with 1,916 participants.40 However, 
included studies investigated deliberate weight 
loss regimens and procedures (energy-restricted 
diets, pharmacotherapy, bariatric surgery) in middle-
aged populations that are likely not representative 
of the nutritional and behavioral stress 
experienced by college students. More relatedly, 
small cross-sectional studies (n = 53) have observed 
differences in richness and evenness between children 
with BMI percentiles between the 15th and 
94th percentiles.41 Conversely, a large cohort study 
of 295 school-aged children (KOALA Cohort 
Study) found no differences in microbial diversity 
and richness when comparing children of different 
weight status 6–7 years after birth.42 Authors of the 
KOALA Cohort Study suggest that they did not 
observe a relationship because they were able to 
control for more confounding factors (e.g., diet, 
lifestyle factors) than most studies. While we report 
similar covariate control and findings, the stability 
of alpha diversity is noteworthy considering our 
longitudinal assessment during a period of 
expected weight gain and major lifestyle changes 
such as the first year of college.

In comparison, the microbial community significantly 
shifted, showing a high degree of variation 
between and within individuals. This shift was 
more pronounced between the first and second 
collections (first distance), with dissimilarity 
decreasing comparing intra-individual differences 
of the first and third collections (second distance). 
These results perhaps indicate a shift closer to baseline 
composition, considering the initial environmental 
changes experienced by the participants. 
Future research may explore changes in microbial 
communities with more frequent sample collections 
as well as continuing throughout the 
advancement of college (i.e., sophomore year, independent 
living off campus, etc.). While community 
shifts were apparent for all three weight change 
categories, the genera that drove the changes in 
participants with WG compared to WL and WM 
microbial structure over the academic year displayed 
some distinction. Protracting elements of 
the WG shift included Bacteroides, Blautia, 
Bifidobacterium, while detractors were Prevotella 
and Faecalibacterium. In the case of many of 
these taxa, we observed the opposite for the microbiome 
of participants with WM and WL, with 
positive contributions from Prevotella and 
Faecalibacterium and negative contributions from 
Bifidobacterium. Regardless of weight change trajectory, 
we noted high coverage of Bacteroides in 
samples. In comparison, the occurrence of 
Prevotella was much less, but when it was present 
in a sample, its relative abundance was pronounced. 
These results align with previous reports 
from larger adult cohorts,33,43,44 where there was 
a clear ecological dichotomy in the presence of 
these genera. Prevotella-dominated microbiomes 
were rare in our overall sample, though did appear 
to be associated with weight change trajectory 
assessing the Prevotella/Bacteroides (P/B) ratio. 
This ratio has been previously shown to predict 
weight loss,30,37 and is associated with a dietary 
intake rich in carbohydrates, resistant starch, and 
fibers, whereas a diet high in fats but low in fibers is 
associated with a low P/B ratio.45 In the present 


study, we noted a significant, though modestly 
greater P/B ratio in the WL vs. WM microbiome. 
Interestingly, all participants reported a low consumption 
of fiber, and we did not detect significant 
differences in fiber, whole grain, or fruit and vegetable 
intake between participants with WG, WL, 
and WM. This may have been related to our dietary 
data collection tools and future work in this population 
should use more precise assessment methods 
such as 24-hour dietary recalls collected in multiple 
passes by nutrition professionals.

Our results reinforce that the P/B ratio can be 
resistant to change,30,33,46 particularly considering 
our participants were free-living and not enrolled 
in a controlled dietary intervention. Such resistance 
has been speculated to be due to a barrier 
greatly limiting the transition between Prevotella- 
and Bacteroides-dominated gut communities.33 
Assessment of longitudinal shifts in alternative 
states of Prevotella and Bacteroides revealed an 
intermediate unstable region where, once crossed, 
resulted in a significant change in abundance to 
an alternative, presumably more stable, state. 
Shifts were much more apparent with the genus 
Prevotella, although did occur with Bacteroides 
when change in abundance crossed a calculated 
threshold (i.e., the tipping point). The bimodality 
of Prevotella is in agreement with previous reports 
including longitudinal assessments,32,47 and our 
data support that both Prevotella- and 
Bacteroides-dominated microbial communities 
shift more along an apparent gradient,48 and are 
highly individualized. Moreover, there was 
a noticeable barrier for transition between compositional 
states. This aligns with the anti- 
correlative relationship between Prevotella and 
Bacteroides in human microbiome and the resistance 
to simple transition to alternative stable 
states. Levy and colleagues postulated that this is 
based on several host factors and microbiome 
dynamics that create regions impermissible (resistant) 
to transit through microbiome state-space.33 
Indeed, we noted this same curvilinear trend in 
each individual microbiome trajectory after mapping 
polynomial regression models for the three 
weight change categories. As hypothesized, to 
transition to either a Prevotella- or Bacteroides- 
dominated state, an individual’s gut microbiome 
must deplete both genera and pass through 
a permissive region in state space.33 This has 
important implications for engineering the microbiota 
in accordance with improving host health, 
including when to make such attempts in an individual’s 
life cycle, how to modify diet, and when/ 
where targeted antimicrobial agents, fecal microbiota 
transplantations, probiotics, and other therapeutics 
may be best leveraged.

Observational studies such as ours and others 
report that direct transitions from a Bacteroides- 
to a Prevotella-dominated state (and vice versa) 
are more infrequent.33 Unsurprisingly, spurring 
this transition is of great therapeutic interest in 
relation to multiple health outcomes as these 
genera have been identified as important correlates 
with diet and aging.44 More recently, 
a randomized control trial in obese adolescents 
(14–18 years old) found that fecal microbiota 
transplantation from lean donors that had 
a high P/B ratio was better able to engraft in the 
recipient’s gut, which promoted shifts in community 
composition.49 Specifically, from 
Bacteroides to Prevotella dominance, showcasing 
the ability of Prevotella taxa to outcompete 
Bacteroides taxa in ecological dominance. 
Depending on several host and environmental 
factors, this may be due to higher bacterial 
growth rates of Prevotella, depending on internal 
and external conditions.50 Interestingly, this pattern 
of unbalanced occurrence has been observed 
across multiple body sites in humans, including 
the airways, gut, skin, oral cavity, and vagina.51 
This occurrence pattern is interesting considering 
that these genera are phylogenetically related 
(i.e., from the order Bacteroidales), yet display 
markedly different functionalities. For example, 
Prevotella has a higher fiber utilizing capacity 
and total short-chain fatty acid production.52 In 
the context of body weight shifts, a microbiome 
with a greater P/B ratio appears to support 
weight decrease when supplied with certain 
nutritional inputs, such as a high fiber/whole- 
grain diet.30,53,54 We did not observe changes in 
nutritional factors in WG, WL, and WM participants 
that would promote such a change, including 
increased dietary fiber, whole-grain, and/or 
fruit and vegetable intake. This potential lack of 
priming the functional capacity of a high P/B 
microbiome may have been partially responsible 


for some of the observed weight change and 
could have important implications for diet modification 
in these individuals.

While we conducted several analyses exploring 
Bacteroides, Prevotella, and other keystone taxa, 
this approach may lend oversimplification to the 
immense dimensionality of microbiome data, especially 
considering the relatively large number of 
samples and ASVs captured in our analysis. This 
was our motivation for dimensionality reduction 
via the formation of latent communities grouped 
by co-occurring bacterial taxa and, in addition to, 
hierarchical clustering. Rather than form discrete 
memberships, a notion forwarded as 
‘enterotypes’,43 we sought to leverage LDA modeling 
for its fractional membership. This tool has 
been implemented with cross-sectional designs 
and has shown recent promise for interpreting 
latent structures within the human gut 
microbiome.55,56 The more pronounced community 
types identified in our analysis, by abundance 
and hierarchical separation, were dominated by 
several genera we had previously identified in our 
PERMANOVA models and relative abundance 
assessment, such as Bacteroides, Prevotella, 
Blautia, Bifidobacterium, and Faecalibacterium. 
The community types that are significantly associated 
with the microbiome of WL participants, 
including types 12, 22, 28, and 30, suggest these 
bacterial communities may play a role in promoting 
weight loss. Considering the vulnerability of 
our population, deleterious lifestyle factors (i.e., 
mood disturbance, dietary intake, alcohol consumption, 
etc.), and within-healthy range starting 
BMI, this should not be viewed as a necessarily 
beneficial outcome. Even so, by percent assigned 
probability, types 28 and 30 were notable features 
and were all but dominated by Prevotella (with 
minor contributions from an unclassified genus 
from the Lachnospiraceae family, Anaerostipes, 
Coprococcus, and Sutterella) and Faecalibacterium 
(with minor contributions from an unclassified 
genus from the Lachnospiraceae family, Blautia, 
Coprococcus, and Fusicatenibacter), respectfully. 
While not the intent of this community analysis, 
the feature importance of these genera in WL participants 
is notable as they have been considered 
commensal fixtures within a healthy gut microbiome. 
For example, species within the 
Faecalibacterium genus, such as F. prausnitzii, are 
known to have anti-inflammatory properties critical 
to colonocyte health57 and are significant butyrate 
producers.58 Moreover, both Faecalibacterium 
and Prevotella have been associated with healthier 
dietary patterns in Western populations (i.e., lower 
fat, greater intake of whole grains and fiber, 
increased diet quality, etc.),54,59,60 with increased 
abundance of Prevotella linked to weight loss 
success.30,37 Conversely, community type 19, 
almost completely dominated by Bacteroides (with 
minor contributions from an unclassified genus 
from the Lachnospiraceae family, Flavonifractor, 
Ruminococcus torque, and UBA 1819), was more 
associated with the microbiome of WM and WG 
participants. Depending on the dietary input, 
Bacteroides has been shown to be positively associated 
with weight gain61 and a determinant of fat 
loss success.30 It should be noted that the genera of 
Faecalibacterium, Bacteroides, and Prevotella all 
have diverse species, and this important nuance 
was likely not captured as we were limited in our 
taxonomic resolution. Indeed, of the 1,000+ ASVs 
after filtering, we had condensed to 160 genera 
prior to community modeling. Regardless, the 
associations found for the three weight loss trajectories 
are consistent with patterns at the genus level 
noted in the context of body weight and composition 
regulation.

As has been reported in previous work employing 
LDA modeling55,56, there is utility in providing 
a more truncated fractional classification to the 
highly complex community of microbes in the 
gut, especially when assessing larger sample sizes. 
Our approach sought to afford more meaningful 
insight into the overall structure of the gut microbiome 
over time. Longitudinal assessments are critical 
as capturing shifts in health states with tools 
like LDA may yield diagnostic value and provision 
for identification of candidate communities and 
taxa as therapeutic targets. Importantly, LDA 
learns patterns of co-occurrence of features rather 
than clustering observations based on distance 
measures. The derived community types may cluster 
based on factors explored here, such as environmental 
exposure and associated factors 
moderated by behavior (i.e., stress, habitual diet, 
etc.). Indeed, upon exploration of the associations 
between community types and anthropometric, 


dietary, and behavioral factors, we noted several 
important trends relating to body weight and composition 
modulation. For instance, waist circumference 
had significant correlations with several of 
the latent community types, while change in body 
weight and BMI did not. As a proxy for central 
adiposity, these findings suggest the significance of 
increased body fat in this region. Community Type 
19, dominated by Bacteroides, and 29 dominated by 
Blautia (with minor contributions from an unclassified 
genus from the Ruminococcaceae family, 
Lachnoclostridium, Monoglobus, and Turicibacter). 
In rodent models, high-fat diets and bile acid influx 
in the gut have been associated with Blautia. 62 In 
humans, Blautia has been associated with visceral 
fat in a large sample of twins from the TwinsUK 
cohort (n = 3,666).63,64 Notably, Blautia in our analysis 
was present in many community types (Types: 
2, 3, 6, 8, 9, 11, 13, 15, 21, 23, 25, 26, and 30) with its 
near exclusive assignment in only one community 
Type (i.e., type 29). Thus, these results provide 
support for fractional assignment of LDA to identify 
the pervasiveness and ability of taxa like Blautia 
to co-operate/habitate with other microbes, 
whether due to ecological pressures and requirements, 
mutually beneficial relationships, function, 
etc. Indeed, the high frequency of co-occurrence 
across community types is plausible considering 
Blautia contains many stress-related genes, can 
utilize many different sugars, and produces organic 
acids (chiefly acetic acid as well as some long-chain 
fatty acids) and an array of secondary 
metabolites.65 Many of these secondary metabolites, 
like non-ribosomal peptides, polyketides, 
lanthipeptides, and bacteriocins, may function to 
aid nutrient acquisition, chemical communication, 
and inhibit/promote colonization of other 
microbes,65–67 which reflects in its ability to reside 
in a diverse range of hosts.68

Other significant associations were unsurprising 
considering the exposures that are present in 
a college setting, such as increased ingestion of 
alcohol and sleep disturbance. Of the 12 significant 
associations observed in the current study, half of 
those between community types and anthropometric, 
dietary, and behavioral factors were related 
to alcohol intake. Excessive alcohol use has been 
suggested to have a profound effect on the gut 
microbiome by depleting several health associated 
taxa, such as Akkermansia, Faecalibacterium, 
Prevotella, Ruminococcus, and increases in potentially 
deleterious microbes, such as 
Enterobacteriaceae.69 Of note, community type 4, 
which was largely driven by Bifidobacterium, was 
positively associated with alcohol and sugar intake. 
Several Bifidobacterium strains have been identified 
for their high capacity for ethanol metabolism 
(encoding the enzymes alcohol dehydrogenase and 
acetaldehyde dehydrogenase) and potential as 
a probiotic agent for alcohol detoxification in 
humans.70–72 However, recent work in mice suggests 
that ethanol does not significantly contribute 
to changes in the gut microbiota, rather the short- 
chain fatty acid acetate that enters the gut after 
being produced by the liver.73 Regardless, 
Bifidobacterium has been found to be positively 
associated with sucrose intake in patients with 
type 2 diabetes.74 Various strains of 
Bifidobacterium have long been known to ferment 
various sugars, including Glucose, Lactose, 
Galactose, Mannitol, and Xylose.75 Moreover, 
Bifidobacterium possesses a bifid shunt, which 
could efficiently produce adenosine triphosphate 
from glucose.76

To the best of our knowledge, no longitudinal 
studies similar to ours in scale and duration have 
been completed in emerging adult populations. 
Many existing studies on gut microbiome structure 
in relation to weight have focused on adult populations. 
Overall, these studies among adults have 
demonstrated that community structure and species 
richness may be associated with obesity or 
weight gain over time.77 However, research indicates 
significant differences between the adult and 
adolescent microbiome, and it has been suggested 
that abundance may drive these differences in community 
composition.17,78 Previous studies have 
also reported that weight is negatively associated 
with microbial diversity, but few studies have 
looked at this relationship longitudinally, especially 
in a vulnerable adolescent population at risk for 
excessive weight gain. These gaps in the current 
literature highlight two major strengths of this 
study: the adolescent population and the longitudinal 
study design. In particular, a free-living adolescent 
sample during a time of expected weight 
gain adds real-world relevance for understanding 
the interplay between weight change and gut 


microbiome composition. Additional strengths of 
this study include the larger sample size and the 
racial and ethnic diversities of the sample, enhancing 
the generalizability of the findings. 
Limitations of this study include unbalanced samples 
across the weight change groups as a result of 
a convenience sample, and high attrition rates for 
longitudinal fecal sample collection. We assessed 
change in individual BMIs, an important indicator 
of health trajectories and often shown to be linked 
to health behaviors. Several of the analyses presented 
were limited to categorical classifications 
of BMI change which may have limited the clinical 
impact of this work when compared to continuous 
data approaches. Further, we want to acknowledge 
limitations in assessing BMI, particularly among 
a diverse population, and emphasize that in 2023, 
the American Medical Association indicated that 
BMI should no longer be used alone as a diagnostic 
tool for obesity.79,80 Regardless, this study serves as 
an important first step in uncovering the many 
underpinning elements of the relationship between 
the gut microbiome, lifestyle factors, and weight 
gain in college students. Further studies assessing 
the impact of the gut microbiome in mediating the 
relationship between lifestyle factors and weight 
gain may help us understand the phenomenon of 
college weight gain. This understanding may better 
inform prevention efforts and minimize weight 
gain throughout early adulthood. Future research 
should focus on more frequent sampling, incorporation 
of additional relevant sample types (i.e., 
fecal and plasma metabolomics), and tighter study 
control. Researchers may also sample both adults 
and adolescents in future longitudinal studies analyzing 
changes in the gut microbiome in relation to 
changes in weight to compare differences by life 
stage. A focus on energy balance studies may also 
be beneficial for elucidating the role of microbes in 
weight change trajectories.

In conclusion, this longitudinal study highlights 
the importance of individual variability, 
drivers of shifts in community structure, and 
the relationship with nutritional and behavioral 
factors on the gut microbiome of adolescents of 
three weight change categories in a college setting. 
While we show many qualities of an adult- 
associated assemblage of gut microbes, such as 
apparent gradients between shifts in taxonomic 
dominance, we also highlight differential variability. 
In our well-phenotyped cohort, we note 
that tracking, let alone, predicting weight change 
by any of the numerous accepted determinants 
(i.e., diet, microbiome, starting weights, psychological 
readouts, etc.) is extremely difficult. 
While we did note some differential shifts in 
taxa associated with weight change classification, 
such results will require reinforcement via replication 
in a distinct, though similar, adolescent 
cohort. Regardless, this formative period, prior 
to adulthood, may ultimately offer an opportunity 
for targeted microbiome inventions. Future 
work should seek to better understand the 
potential malleability at this life-stage and 
whether certain interventions can be more effectively 
leveraged here to align an individual’s 
weight-trajectory to a healthy state.

Materials and methods

Participants and study design

The devilWASTE study was a sub-study of the 
Social impact of Physical Activity and 
nutRition in College (SPARC) study, which 
sought to analyze relationships between lifestyle 
factors, weight outcomes, and the social networks 
of first-year college students.24 
DevilWASTE participants were recruited from 
the SPARC cohort from six dorms across three 
different Arizona State University (ASU) campuses. 
Participants in devilSPARC were 
recruited from one dorm on each of the three 
campuses. The exclusion criteria for 
devilWASTE included age less than 18 years, 
certain gastrointestinal conditions such as 
malabsorptive disease, history of eating disorders, 
antibiotic use 2–3 months prior to study 
visits, and current conditions that affect the 
microbiome including HIV infection, diabetes, 
or high blood pressure. Inclusion criteria 
included living in a residence hall at ASU, 
English speaking, and participation in the 
SPARC study. Eligible participants provided 
written informed consent before enrollment. 
The devilWASTE study and the parent SPARC 
study were approved by the Arizona State 
University Institutional Review Board.


Data collection

Recruitment for devilWASTE took place during the 
academic year starting in August 2015 and data collection 
continued through May 2016. All participants 
were made aware of the study at dormitory floor 
meetings, after which they provided voluntary, written 
informed consent. Consent was not obtained until 
study staff ensured that all questions and concerns 
had been addressed individually with each potential 
participant. The study protocol, recruitment, and data 
collection documents were reviewed and approved by 
the Arizona State University Institutional Review 
Board on July 30, 2015 (IRB# 1309009596). 
Participants provided stool samples at up to three of 
the four SPARC study time points (beginning and end 
of fall and spring semesters). In total, we collected 507 
stool samples from 272 participants. Due to the 
expected high attrition rate for longitudinal sampling 
in a shared living environment (e.g., stigma and high- 
stress environment), we lost 133 participants to follow-
up leaving an n of 139 for this analysis. Only 
individuals who provided at least two stool samples 
(two samples, n = 45; three samples, n = 94) at any 
time throughout the study duration were retained in 
the present study to support this longitudinal analysis. 
At each time point, anthropometrics, physical activity, 
and diet information were collected.

Anthropometrics were obtained by trained 
research staff using Seca 869 scales (Seca, USA) 
for weight, Seca 217 stadiometers (Seca, USA) for 
height, and flexible, tension spring-loaded Gulick 
measuring tapes for waist circumference (Creative 
Health Products, USA). These measurements were 
completed up to three times to ensure accuracy. 
The two measures that were within 0.5 kg and 0.5 
cm for weight and height, respectively, were averaged 
for final measurements. Participant BMIs 
were calculated and reported in kg/m2.

Questionnaires were used to evaluate lifestyle behaviors. 
Physical activity was assessed with the Godin- 
Shephard Leisure-Time Physical Activity 
Questionnaire which categorizes and quantifies activity 
into vigorous, moderate, and light physical 
activity.81 Sedentary behavior was assessed with an 
additional question: “Yesterday, how much time did 
you spend in front of a screen (excluding time in class 
and being physically active)?”.82 Participants selected 
a response from a range of zero to six hours. Self- 
reported dietary intake was reported using the 
National Cancer Institute Dietary Screener 
Questionnaire that assesses consumption frequency 
of key food items and food groups.83 This tool does 
not estimate caloric intake but rather tracks consumption 
of food group categories such as fruits and vegetables, 
high-fat and processed foods, added sugar, 
dietary fiber, and whole-grain intake. Weekly alcohol 
intake was assessed by the number of drinks consumed 
weekly by asking: “For each day of the week 
in the calendar below, indicate the number of alcoholic 
drinks typically consumed on that day (Only if 
yes to alcohol is selected).” The dropdown ranged 
from 1 to 15 drinks for all days of the week.

Fecal sample collection and processing

After anthropometrics and assessments were completed, 
participants were given a stool sample collection 
kit (Commode Specimen Collection Kit, 
Fisher Scientific, Anthem, AZ) and a brief demonstration 
on how to properly collect a sample. This 
kit was labeled with a devilWASTE-specific participant 
ID as well as contact information for the 
study staff and written instructions. Contents of the 
kit included a collection bowl and bag that were 
pre-weighed as well as a cooler and ice pack to keep 
the sample cold until it reached the Healthy 
Lifestyles Research Center on the Downtown ASU 
campus. Participants were instructed to call 
research staff immediately after collection, so that 
samples could be retrieved within 60 minutes to 
avoid bacterial growth and changes in microbial 
communities. Fecal samples were then stored at 
-80°C until extraction. Samples were processed 
after defrosting at 4°C. Between 0.150 and 0.250 g 
of feces was put into 2 mL PowerBead tubes from 
a MoBio Power Soil DNA Isolation Kit (12888– 
100, MoBio, Carlsbad, CA).

MoBio Power Soil DNA Isolation Kits (12888–100, 
MoBio, Carlsbad, CA) were used to extract microbial 
DNA from fecal samples in the laboratory of the 
Principal Investigator (CMW). These kits combine 
a series of salt and ethanol-based solutions as well as 
filtering, and centrifugation methods to first decrease 
the amount of fecal matter in the sample and then 
break the cell membranes of microbial cells to release 
the DNA. Due to inherent challenges in extracting 

DNA from fecal matter which is comprised of 
a complex mixture of lipids, carbohydrates, salts, 
and cells, a heating step was incorporated at the beginning 
of the protocol as well as an additional cleaning 
protocol to ensure no fecal inhibitors remained in the 
final DNA sample. These additions are briefly outlined 
below and were recommended by the extraction 
kit manufacturer (MoBio, Carlsbad, CA).

The heating step involved heating the PowerBead 
tube with Bead Solution, fecal sample, and Solution 
C1 in a heat block at 65°C for 10 min. Heating followed 
gently inverting the sample tube after the addition 
of Solution C1. The cleaning protocol involved 
adding 100 µl of extracted DNA to a new 2 ml collection 
tube along with 50 µl of Bead Solution, 25 µl of 
Solution C2, and 25 µl of Solution C3. The sample was 
vortexed briefly after each reagent addition, followed 
by centrifugation at 13,000 × g for 2 minutes at room 
temperature. Supernatant (~160–190 µl) was transferred 
to a clean 2 ml collection tube. After gently 
shaking, 400 µl of Solution C4 was added to the collection 
tube and vortexed to mix. Tube contents were 
then applied to the spin filter and centrifuged at 
10,000 × g for 1 minute at room temperature. Filter 
flow through was discarded. In two rounds, 500 µl of 
Solution C5 was added to the spin filter and centrifuged 
at 10,000 × g for 30 seconds at room temperature. 
Flow through was discarded and the spin filter 
was centrifuged at maximum speed for 2 minutes at 
room temperature. Finally, the DNA was eluted by 
placing the spin filter in a new 2 ml collection tube, 
adding 50 µl of Solution C6 to the center of the filter 
membrane, incubating for 1 minute at room temperature, 
and centrifuging at room temperature for 1 
minute at 10,000 × g, after which the spin filter was 
discarded.

Once the DNA was isolated, sample quality and 
concentration were obtained using a QIAxpert high- 
speed microfluidic UV/VIS spectrophotometer 
(9002340, QIAGEN, Germantown, MD). A total of 
507 longitudinally obtained samples from 272 participants 
were extracted and sent for sequencing.

Fecal microbiome analysis

Samples were sequenced at the ASU Biodesign 
Institute Genomics Core Lab. At the lab, sequences 
were quantified using the Quant-iT PicoGreen 
assay (P7589, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). 
Sequencing methods began with amplification 
through triplicate PCR in 96-well plates followed 
by next-generation sequencing to identify bacterial 
features. Amplification of the 16S rRNA gene 
sequence was completed using primers for the conserved 
V4 region of the bacterial genome. The V4 
region was identified using the forward 515F primers 
and 806 R reverse primers containing 
Illumina adaptor sequences. Purification and 
quantification materials used for PCR in the 
Genomics Core Lab included the QIAquick PCR 
Purification (28106, Qiagen, Germantown, MD), 
and KAPA Library Quantification Kits (KK4824, 
Kapa Biosystems, Wilmington, MA). After PCR 
completion, sequencing was carried out on the 
Illumina MiSeq instrument (SY-410-1003, 
Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA). All protocols were 
completed in accordance with best practices established 
by the Earth Microbiome Project 
guidelines.84

The 16S rRNA sequencing produced 7,804,945 
reads with a median of 20,093 per sample. Paired 
end demultiplexed sequences were added into the 
Quantitative Insights into Microbial Ecology 2 
(QIIME2) software pipeline and denoised using 
the DADA2 command (trimmed at position 14 
and truncated at position 250) to remove low- 
quality regions and construct a feature table 
using ASVs.85 Next, the ASV feature table was 
passed through the feature-classifier plugin, 
which was implemented using a naive Bayes 
machine-learning classifier, pre-trained to discern 
taxonomy mapped to the latest version of the 
rRNA database SILVA (138.1; 99% ASVs from 
515F/806 R region of sequences).86 
A phylogenetic tree was then constructed using 
the fragment-insertion plugin with SILVA at 
a p-sampling depth of the rarefaction threshold 
to impute high-quality reads and normalize for 
uneven sequencing depth between samples. 
A phyloseq (v1.38.0.) object was then created, 
and downstream analyses and visualizations 
were performed in R (v4.1.2.). Sequences identified 
as Archaea and unclassified Bacteria at the 
Phyla level, as well as mitochondrial and plant 
DNA, were removed. Samples were rarified for 
downstream diversity analysis (7,300 sequences/ 
sample).

For the diversity analysis, we implemented 
a phylogenetically informed approach. Specifically, 
alpha diversity was measured using Faith’s PD using 
the picante package (v1.8.2.). In addition, the 
observed ASVs were calculated to survey the overall 
richness with the phyloseq package. Beta diversity 
was calculated using weighted UniFrac, placing 
emphasis on dominant taxa, and unweighted 
UniFrac, to consider dissimilarity merely on membership. 
These beta diversity metrics were calculated 
with the phyloseq package.

To assess the community type of each participant 
sample at the genus level, we applied LDA 
probabilistic models. A low cutoff for taxa filtering 
was used (i.e., taxa with a total relative abundance 
of 1e-5 were filtered out) per the nature of this 
method, as previously described.55 Samples were 
then surveyed to estimate the most preferable number 
of latent community types using the 
‘FindTopicsNumber’ function in the ldatuning 
package (v1.0.2.). The scoring algorithms 
“CaoJuan2009”87 and “Arun2010”88 were specified 
as metrics, and the model fit was established using 
Gibbs’ sampling method. The number of ideal 
community types was determined to be 30, and 
per-community type-per-taxa and per-sample-per- 
community type were extracted after performing 
the LDA using the ‘LDA’ function in the topicsmodels 
package (v0.2.12.). The per-sample-per- 
community type probabilities were multiplied by 
the read count for each sample. Hierarchical cluster 
analysis was then performed using an agglomerative 
nesting approach (based on a lower number of 
community types) on scale normalized data, as 
previously reported.55 This was conducted with 
the ‘agnes’ function in the cluster package (v2.1.4.) 
using Ward’s minimum variance method. The 
optimal number of clusters was determined with 
the Dunn Index. Visualization was expressed with 
a dendrogram and cluster plot with the factoextra 
package (v1.0.7).

Statistical analysis

Anthropometric, behavioral, and dietary data 
from participants were first assessed for normality 
using QQ-plots and Shapiro–Wilk’s test. 
Differences in baseline values between weight 
change categories were then analyzed by 
ANOVA or Kruskal–Wallis tests, depending on 
normality. Associations between these factors 
were assessed with Spearman’s rank correlation 
coefficients. Changes in anthropometric, behavioral, 
and dietary data were calculated for the 
first and last collection and assessed between 
weight change categories by ANOVA or 
Kruskal–Wallis tests with Bonferroni post-hoc 
comparisons, where appropriate. The association 
between change in body weight and waist circumference 
was assessed by Pearson’s partial correlation 
analysis, controlling for baseline BMI, sex, 
and individual participant.

For the gut microbiome, alpha diversity metrics 
were assessed for normality (Shapiro–Wilk’s tests) 
and log-transformed. Next, LME models were used 
to test the effect of time and the interaction of 
group and time using the nLME package 
(v3.1.153.). Models included baseline BMI and sex 
as covariates with participant included as a random 
effect. For any significant interactions, pairwise 
testing was performed using the emmeans package 
(v1.8.0.). Associations between baseline alpha 
diversity and body weight were assessed with multiple 
regression models using the lmtest package 
(v0.9.40.) to explore potential differential diet 
responses using the gut microbiome as 
a determinant. These associations were calculated 
using baseline alpha diversity metrics and change 
in body weight (post – pre values), accounting for 
sex, baseline BMI, and the individual. For beta 
diversity, the mantel test was utilized to assess the 
correlation between the weighted and unweighted 
UniFrac distance matrices for all samples via the 
vegan package (v2.6.2.) with 999 permutations. 
Next, PERMANOVA tests were constructed for 
UniFrac distances in the vegan package testing the 
effects of the individual (nested factor), weight 
change category, all time points, and the interaction 
between these factors, controlling for sex and 
baseline BMI (number of permutations = 999). 
Contributions from dominant genera to the 
PERMANOVA models of weighted UniFrac distances 
were determined by passing the resulting 
PERMANOVA object through the coefficients 
function found in the base stats package in 
R. Intra- and inter-individual compositional variability 
was calculated between all sequential microbiome 
samples for both weighted and unweighted 

UniFrac distances, log transformed, and compared 
by weight change categories using LME models 
accounting for baseline BMI, sex, and the individual 
(as a random effect). To assess the overall 
differences between intra- and inter-individual 
variability, all values were pooled by comparison 
and assessed via a Wilcoxon rank sum test.

To calculate the ratio between the genera 
Prevotella and Bacteroides, we converted taxonomic 
data to relative abundance, added a pseudo count of 
5.0 × 10-7 to samples where Prevotella was not present 
(as previously described),37 performed a log10 
transformation on both, and then divided Prevotella 
by Bacteroides. Employing the nLME package 
a LME model was used to test the effect of time 
(first and last time points) and the interaction of 
group and time with baseline BMI and sex as covariates 
with participant included as a random effect. 
For any significant interactions, pairwise testing was 
performed using the emmeans package. The PSI was 
calculated for baseline CLR transformed relative 
abundance of Prevotella and Bacteroides using the 
‘bimodality’ function in the microbiome package 
(v1.18.0.). A TP analysis was calculated on the CLR 
transformed relative abundance of Prevotella and 
Bacteroides for all samples using a bootstrapped 
potential analysis (n bootstrap iterations = 100) 
with the microbiome package. The abundance deviation 
of these genera for each participant was 
summed and compared by participants that crossed 
the TP and those that did not using Wilcoxon rank 
sum tests. To assess the trend of state transition 
between Prevotella and Bacteroides, we performed 
polynomial regression with the nLME package using 
the difference in their relative abundance and their 
sum subtracted from one, as previously described.33

Variation of taxa at the genus level was assessed 
for all samples on CLR-transformed relative abundance 
of features with a detection of =1.0% for at 
least 10% of the samples. Intra- and inter- 
individual variance was extracted for each taxon 
via LMM, with participant acting as a random variable 
using the function ‘lmer’ in the package Lme4 
(v1.1.30.). Total variance was calculated by summing 
the intra- and inter-individual variance and 
ICC by dividing the inter-individual variation by 
the total variation of the relative abundance for 
each genus. Associations between CLR relative 
abundance and ICC and total variation were performed 
using Spearman’s rank correlation tests. 
Differences between weight change categories for 
ICC and total variance were performed using 
Wilcoxon rank sum tests.

For the LDA data, associations between predictor 
variables and community types were 
assessed using Dirichlet regression models with 
the DirichletReg package (v0.7.1). Models were 
first constructed for weight change trajectory 
with baseline samples of the 30 latent community 
types as the response variables. Next, the second 
and third longitudinal samples were pooled, and 
models were formed for 13 predictors as continuous 
variables (anthropometric, dietary, and 
behavioral factors) with the 30 community 
types. All predictor variables were standardized 
by their standard deviation, as previously 
described55. Model fit was assessed by building 
in relevant covariates, which ultimately led to 
each model being adjusted for sex and initial 
BMI. An alpha value of <0.05 was used to denote 
statistical significance, and P-value adjustments 
were performed where appropriate using the 
Benjamini–Hochberg (BH) procedure. All statistical 
analyses were performed in the 
R environment (v4.1.2.).