BACKGROUND: COVID-19 inequities are abundant in low-income communities of color. 
Addressing COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy to promote equitable and sustained 
vaccination for underserved communities requires a multi-level, scalable, and 
sustainable approach. It is also essential that efforts acknowledge the broader 
healthcare needs of these communities including engagement in preventive 
services.
METHODS: This is a hybrid type 3 effectiveness-implementation study that will 
include a multi-level, longitudinal, mixed-methods data collection approach 
designed to assess the sustained impact of a co-created multicomponent strategy 
relying on bidirectional learning, shared decision-making, and expertise by all 
team members. The study capitalizes on a combination of implementation 
strategies including mHealth outreach with culturally appropriate messaging, 
care coordination to increase engagement in high priority preventive services, 
and the co-design of these strategies using community advisory boards led by 
Community Weavers. Community Weavers are individuals with lived experience as 
members of an underserved community serving as cultural brokers between 
communities, public health systems, and researchers to co-create 
community-driven, culturally sensitive public health solutions. The study will 
use an adaptive implementation approach operationalized in a sequential multiple 
assignment randomized trial design of 300 participants from three sites in a 
Federally Qualified Health Center in Southern California. This design will allow 
examining the impact of various implementation strategy components and deliver 
more intensive support to those who benefit from it most. The primary 
effectiveness outcomes are COVID-19 vaccine completion, engagement in preventive 
services, and vaccine confidence. The primary implementation outcomes are reach, 
adoption, implementation, and maintenance of the multicomponent strategy over a 
12-month follow-up period. Mixed-effects logistic regression models will be used 
to examine program impacts and will be triangulated with qualitative data from 
participants and implementers.
DISCUSSION: This study capitalizes on community engagement, implementation 
science, health equity and communication, infectious disease, and public health 
perspectives to co-create a multicomponent strategy to promote the uptake of 
COVID-19 vaccination and preventive services for underserved communities in San 
Diego. The study design emphasizes broad engagement of our community and clinic 
partners leading to culturally sensitive and acceptable strategies to produce 
lasting and sustainable increases in vaccine equity and preventive services 
engagement.