Outcomes 12 Months After Temperature-Controlled Radiofrequency Device Treatment 
of the Nasal Valve for Patients With Nasal Airway Obstruction.

1/IMPORTANCE: Nasal valve collapse is a primary cause of nasal airway obstruction 
(NAO). Patients with NAO and nasal valve collapse experience a variety of 
symptoms that lower their quality of life, such as nasal congestion, headache, 
sleep disturbance, daytime sleepiness, and snoring.
OBJECTIVE: To determine if active treatment of the nasal valve with a 
temperature-controlled radiofrequency (TCRF) device, previously demonstrated 
superior to a sham procedure at 3 months, was safe and associated with sustained 
improvements in symptoms of NAO through 12 months.
2/DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: In a prospective, multicenter, 
single-blinded, randomized clinical trial, patients in 16 centers in the US with 
index procedures between August and December 2020 were assigned to TCRF device 
treatment of the nasal valve or a sham control procedure (no RF energy). 
Patients had a baseline Nasal Obstruction Symptom Evaluation (NOSE) Scale score 
of 55 or greater with nasal valve collapse as the primary or substantial 
contributor to NAO. After primary end point evaluation at 3 months, eligible 
patients in the sham control arm crossed over to active treatment. Data analysis 
was performed between April and May 2022.
INTERVENTIONS: Patients were treated bilaterally with the TCRF device at 4 or 
fewer nonoverlapping areas on the nasal mucosa at the junction of the upper and 
lower lateral cartilage on the lateral nasal wall.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary end point measure was responder rate, 
defined as 20% or greater reduction in NOSE Scale score or 1 or greater 
reduction in NOSE Scale clinical severity category.
3/RESULTS: A total of 108 patients received active treatment (77 as index active 
treatment, 31 after crossover). The mean (SD) age of patients was 48.5 (12.3) 
years; 66 (61.1%) were women. The combined group of patients receiving active 
treatment had a mean baseline NOSE Scale score of 76.3 (95% CI, 73.6-79.1). At 
12 months (n = 88), the responder rate was 89.8% (95% CI, 81.7%-94.5%). The NOSE 
Scale score improved from baseline (mean change, -44.9 [95% CI, -52.1 to 
-37.7]). No device/procedure-related serious adverse events were reported.
4/CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this follow-up of a cohort from a randomized 
clinical trial, the minimally invasive TCRF device, previously demonstrated to 
be superior to a sham procedure, was safe and associated with improvement in 
symptoms of NAO through 12 months postprocedure.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT04549545.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaoto.2022.2293
PMCID: PMC9437830
PMID: 36048465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Han 
reported receiving personal fees from Aerin Medical (research consultant) during 
the conduct of the study; and personal fees (research consultant) from 
Medtronic, Intersect ENT, Genentech, Sanofi Genzyme, AstraZeneca, and 
GlaxoSmithKline outside the submitted work. Dr Silvers reported receiving 
personal fees (consultant) from Aerin Medical and Intersect ENT outside the 
submitted work. Dr Yen reported receiving research funding from Aerin Medical 
during the conduct of the study; and personal fees from OptiNose US, Stryker 
ENT, Regeneron, Sanofi Genzyme, Genentech, Oyster Point Pharma, Neurent Medical; 
stock options from Cyrano Therapeutics and Sound Health; and research funding 
from GlaxoSmithKline, OptiNose US, Gossamer Bio, Septal Solutions, Stryker ENT, 
Lyra Therapeutics, Neurent Medical, AstraZeneca, and Sound Health outside the 
submitted work. No other disclosures were reported.