Immunogenicity and safety of concomitant administration of the 
sabin-strain-based inactivated poliovirus vaccine, the 
diphtheria-tetanus-acellular pertussis vaccine, and measles-mumps-rubella 
vaccine to healthy infants aged 18 months in China.

1/OBJECTIVES: During the COVID-19 pandemic, there was a decline in vaccine 
coverage, and the implementation of combined vaccines and co-administration 
strategies emerged as potential solutions to alleviate this predicament. Our 
objective is to delve into the concurrent administration of the 
sabin-strain-based inactivated poliovirus vaccine (sIPV), the 
diphtheria-tetanus-acellular pertussis vaccine (DTaP), and measles-mumps-rubella 
vaccine (MMR), with the intention of bridging the evidentiary gap pertaining to 
vaccine co-administration in Chinese infants, and to ensure a safe and effective 
vaccination strategy, ultimately leading to an augmentation in immunization 
coverage.

2/METHODS: This study was a follow-up trial of the "Immunogenicity and safety of 
concomitant administration of the sIPV with the DTaP vaccine in children: a 
multicenter, randomized, non-inferiority, controlled trial." Blood samples were 
collected on day 0 and day 30, and serum antibody levels were detected to 
measure antibody responses to each of the antigens. Local and systemic adverse 
events were monitored and compared among groups. This study is the first to fill 
the knowledge gap in China regarding the safe and effective combined vaccination 
of sIPV, DTaP, and MMR vaccines.

3/RESULTS: The geometric mean titer of the poliovirus types I, II, and III 
neutralizing antibodies were 1060.22 (95% CI: 865.73-1298.39), 1537.06 (95% CI: 
1324.27-1784.05), and 1539.10 (95% CI: 1296.37-1827.29) in group I on day 30; 
geometric mean titer of antibodies against DTaP and MMR in the simultaneous 
vaccination group was non-inferior to those in the DTaP alone and MMR alone 
group. Reporting rates of local and systemic adverse reactions were similar 
between groups and no serious adverse events were reported throughout the 
clinical study period.

4/CONCLUSION: Co-administration of the sIPV, DTaP, and MMR was safe and did not 
impact immunogenicity, which would help to mitigate administrative costs and 
enhance vaccine coverage rates.
