BACKGROUND: Cervical cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in Kenyan 
women. Integrating cervical cancer screening into family planning (FP) clinics 
is a promising strategy to improve health for reproductive-aged women. The 
objective of this cluster randomized trial was to test the efficacy of an 
implementation strategy, the Systems Analysis and Improvement Approach (SAIA), 
as a tool to increase cervical cancer screening in FP clinics in Mombasa County, 
Kenya.
METHODS: Twenty FP clinics in Mombasa County were randomized 1:1 to SAIA versus 
usual procedures. SAIA has five steps: (1) cascade analysis tool to understand 
the cascade and identify inefficiencies, (2) sequential process flow mapping to 
identify bottlenecks, (3) develop and implement workflow modifications 
(micro-interventions) to address identified bottlenecks, (4) assess the 
micro-intervention in the cascade analysis tool, and (5) repeat the cycle. 
Prevalence ratios were calculated using Poisson regression with robust standard 
errors to compare the proportion of visits where women were screened for 
cervical cancer in SAIA clinics compared to control clinics.
RESULTS: In the primary intent-to-treat analysis in the last quarter of the 
trial, 2.5% (37/1507) of visits with eligible FP clients at intervention 
facilities included cervical cancer screening compared to 3.7% (66/1793) in 
control clinics (prevalence ratio [PR] 0.67, 95% CI 0.45-1.00). When adjusted 
for having at least one provider trained to perform cervical cancer screening at 
baseline, there was no significant difference between screening in intervention 
clinics compared to control clinics (adjusted PR 1.14, 95% CI 0.74-1.75).
CONCLUSIONS: The primary analysis did not show an effect on cervical cancer 
screening. However, the COVID-19 pandemic and a healthcare worker strike likely 
impacted SAIA's implementation with significant disruptions in FP care delivery 
during the trial. While SAIA's data-informed decision-making and clinic-derived 
solutions are likely important, future work should directly study the mechanisms 
through which SAIA operates and the influence of contextual factors on 
implementation.