Effect of BATHE interview technique on patient satisfaction in an ambulatory family medicine centre in South India

1/Objective: The objective of the study is to determine the effect of background, affect, trouble, handling and empathy (BATHE) versus usual interview technique on patient satisfaction during regular consultation with family physicians in ambulatory care.

2/Design: The research design was a prospective, randomised control trial.

Setting: The trial took place in a family practice unit in South India, which was one of the clinical service units of the academic Department of Family Medicine of a tertiary hospital.

Participant: The eligible participants were adults above the age of 18 years, who did not have any acute presenting illness. The participants should have given consent and also not have any cognitive disability. A total of 138 participants took part in the trial, 70 in BATHE group and 68 in the non-BATHE group. All participants entering the trial completed the questionnaire.

3/Result: The BATHE group had a significantly higher mean score for questions grouped under professional satisfaction. This included questions on whether the patient felt that the physician treated them as a person and also whether they felt the appropriate clinical examination was communicated to them. The questionnaire used for scoring satisfaction had 18 questions with a maximum possible score of 90. When taking a cut-off of 75% (68) from the total possible score of 90, 72.9% (51) of the participants for whom the BATHE consultation technique was used were satisfied as compared with only 55.9% (30) for whom the routine consultation was carried out. This was statistically significant (χ2=11.15, p value=0.0006) 

4/CONCLUSION: The study suggests that using BATHE in this family practice centre is beneficial in improving the perception of person centeredness in the consultation. However, further studies ruling out all possible bias are needed in our setting before the range of probable benefits of the BATHE technique can be fully gauged.