BACKGROUND: Gains in malaria control are threatened by widespread pyrethroid 
resistance in malaria vectors across sub-Saharan Africa. New long-lasting 
insecticidal nets (LLINs) containing two active ingredients (dual 
active-ingredient LLINs) have been developed to interrupt transmission in areas 
of pyrethroid resistance. We aimed to evaluate the effectiveness of three dual 
active-ingredient LLINs compared with standard pyrethroid LLINs against 
pyrethroid-resistant malaria vectors in rural Tanzania.
METHODS: In this study, we did a secondary analysis of entomological data from a 
four-group, 3 year, single-blind, cluster-randomised controlled trial carried 
out between Feb 18, 2019, and Dec 6, 2021. We conducted quarterly indoor 
mosquito collections using the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention light 
trap, in eight houses in each of the 84 study clusters in the Misungwi district, 
northwestern Tanzania. Anopheles vectors were then tested for malaria parasites 
and identified at species level, to distinguish between sibling species of the 
Anopheles gambiae and Anopheles funestus groups, using molecular laboratory 
techniques. The primary outcomes were density of different malaria vector 
species measured as the number of female Anopheles collected per household per 
night, the entomological inoculation rate (EIR), an indicator of malaria 
transmission, and sporozoite rate. Entomological outcomes were assessed on the 
basis of intention to treat, and the effect of the three dual active-ingredient 
LLINs was compared with the standard pyrethroid LLINs at household level.
FINDINGS: Dual active-ingredient LLINs had the greatest effect on Anopheles 
funestus sl, the most efficient vector in the study area, with comparatively 
weak effect on An arabiensis. An funestus density was 3∙1 per house per night in 
the pyrethroid LLIN group, 1∙2 in the chlorfenapyr pyrethroid LLIN group 
(adjusted density ratio [aDR]=0∙26, 95% CI 0∙17-0∙14, p<0∙0001), 1∙4 in the 
piperonyl-butoxide pyrethroid LLIN group (aDR=0∙49, 0∙32-0∙76, p=0∙0012), and 
3∙0 in the pyriproxyfen pyrethroid LLIN group (aDR=0∙72, 0∙47-1∙11, p=0∙15). 
Malaria transmission intensity was also significantly lower in the chlorfenapyr 
pyrethroid group, with 0∙01 versus 0∙06 infective bites per household per night 
in the pyrethroid LLIN group (aDR=0∙21, 0∙14-0∙33, p<0∙0001). Ecological niche 
models indicated that vector-species distribution was stable following LLIN 
intervention despite the reductions observed in An funestus sl density.