BACKGROUND: Short-term neck pain after posterior cervical foraminotomy 
(posterior surgery) compared with anterior cervical discectomy with fusion 
(anterior surgery) treating cervical radiculopathy has only been assessed once, 
retrospectively, to our knowledge. The aim of this study was to prospectively 
evaluate the course of neck pain for 6 weeks after both treatments.
METHODS: This is a secondary analysis of the multicenter Foraminotomy ACDF 
Cost-Effectiveness Trial (FACET), conducted from January 2016 to May 2020. Of 
389 patients who had single-level, 1-sided cervical radiculopathy and were 
screened for eligibility, 265 were randomly assigned to undergo posterior 
surgery (n = 132) or anterior surgery (n = 133). The primary outcome of the 
present analysis was neck pain, assessed weekly for 6 weeks using the visual 
analog scale (VAS), on a scale of 0 to 100. The secondary outcomes were arm 
pain, neck disability, work ability, quality of life, treatment satisfaction, 
motor and sensory changes, and hospital length of stay. Data were analyzed with 
mixed model analysis in intention-to-treat samples using 2-sided 95% confidence 
intervals (CIs).
RESULTS: In the first postoperative week, the mean VAS for neck pain was 56.2 mm 
(95% CI, 51.7 to 60.8 mm) after posterior surgery and 46.7 mm (95% CI, 42.2 to 
51.2 mm) after anterior surgery. The mean between-group difference was 9.5 mm 
(95% CI, 3.3 to 15.7 mm), which gradually decreased to 2.3 mm (95% CI, -3.6 to 
8.1 mm) at postoperative week 6. As of postoperative week 5, there was no 
significant difference between groups. Responder analyses confirmed this result. 
Secondary outcomes showed small differences between groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Insight into the course of neck pain during the first 6 weeks after 
posterior compared with anterior surgery is provided. Despite initially more 
neck pain after posterior surgery, patients swiftly improved and, as of 
postoperative week 5, results similar to those after anterior surgery were 
observed. Our findings should enable improved patient counseling and enhanced 
shared decision-making between physicians and patients with cervical 
radiculopathy, where more neck pain in the first postoperative weeks should be 
balanced against the benefits of posterior surgery.