BACKGROUND: Intensive care unit (ICU) patients on mechanical ventilation often 
require sedation and analgesia to improve comfort and decrease pain. Prolonged 
sedation and analgesia, however, may increase time on mechanical ventilation, 
risk for ventilator associated pneumonia, and delirium. Coordinated 
interruptions in sedation [spontaneous awakening trials (SATs)] and spontaneous 
breathing trials (SBTs) increase ventilator-free days and improve mortality. 
Coordination of SATs and SBTs is difficult with substantial implementation 
barriers due to difficult-to-execute sequencing between nurses and respiratory 
therapists. Telehealth-enabled remote care has the potential to overcome these 
barriers and improve coordinated SAT and SBT adherence by enabling proactive 
high-risk patient monitoring, surveillance, and real-time assistance to 
frontline ICU teams.
METHODS: The telehealth-enabled, real-time audit and feedback for clinician 
adherence (TEACH) study will determine whether adding a telehealth augmented 
real-time audit and feedback to a usual supervisor-led audit and feedback 
intervention will yield higher coordinated SAT and SBT adherence and more 
ventilator-free days in mechanically ventilated patients than a usual 
supervisor-led audit and feedback intervention alone in a type II hybrid 
effectiveness-implementation cluster-randomized clinical trial in 12 
Intermountain Health hospitals with 15 ICUs. In the active comparator control 
group (six hospitals), the only intervention is the usual supervisor-led audit 
and feedback implementation. The telehealth-enabled support (TEACH) intervention 
in six hospitals adds real-time identification of patients eligible for a 
coordinated SAT and SBT and consultative input from telehealth respiratory 
therapists, nurses, and physicians to the bedside clinicians to promote 
adherence including real-time assistance with execution. All intubated and 
mechanically ventilated patients ≥ 16 years of age are eligible for enrollment 
except for patients who die on the day of intubation or have preexisting brain 
death. Based on preliminary power analyses, we plan a 36-month intervention 
period that includes a 90-day run-in period. Estimated enrollment in the final 
analysis is up to 9900 mechanically ventilated patients over 33 months.
DISCUSSION: The TEACH study will enhance implementation science by providing 
insight into how a telehealth intervention augmenting a usual audit and feedback 
implementation may improve adherence to coordinated SAT and SBT and increase 
ventilator-free days.