Validation of a real-time biliopancreatic endoscopic ultrasonography analytical 
device in China: a prospective, single-centre, randomised, controlled trial.

1/BACKGROUND: Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) is a key procedure for the 
diagnosis of biliopancreatic diseases. However, the performance among EUS 
endoscopists varies greatly and leads to blind spots during the operation, which 
can impair the health outcomes of patients. We previously developed an 
artificial intelligence (AI) device that accurately identified EUS standard 
stations and significantly reduced the difficulty of ultrasonography image 
interpretation. In this study, we updated the device (named EUS-IREAD) and 
validated its performance in improving the quality of EUS procedures.

2/METHODS: In this single-centre, randomised, controlled trial, we updated 
EUS-IREAD so it consisted of five learning models to identify eight EUS stations 
and 24 anatomical structures. The trial was done at the Renmin Hospital of Wuhan 
University (Wuhan, China) and included patients aged 18 years or older with 
suspected biliopancreatic (pancreas and biliopancreatic duct) lesions due to 
clinical symptoms, radiological findings, or laboratory findings, and with a 
high risk of pancreatic cancer. Patients were randomly assigned (1:1) by a 
dedicated research assistant using a computer-generated random number series 
(with a block size of four) to undergo the EUS procedure with or without the 
assistance of EUS-IREAD. Endoscopists in the EUS-IREAD-assisted group were 
required to observe all standard stations and anatomical structures according to 
the prompts by the AI device. Data collectors, the independent data anaylsis 
team, and patients were masked to group allocation. The primary outcome was the 
missed scanning rate of standard stations between the two groups, which was 
assessed in patients who underwent EUS procedure in accordance with the assigned 
intervention (per protocol). This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, 
NCT05457101.

3/FINDINGS: Between July 9, 2022, and Feb 28, 2023, 290 patients (mean age 55·93 
years [SD 14·06], 152 [52%] male, and 138 [48%] female) were randomly assigned 
and analysed, including 144 in the EUS-IREAD-assisted group and 146 in the 
control group. The EUS-IREAD-assisted group had a lower missed scanning rate of 
stations than the control group (4·5% [SD 0·8] vs 14·3% [1·0], -9·8% [95% CI 
-12·2 to -7·5]; odds ratio 3·6 [95% Cl 2·6 to 4·9]; p<0·0001). No significant 
adverse event was found during the study.

4/INTERPRETATION: Our study confirms the capability of EUS-IREAD to monitor the 
blind spots and reduce the missed rate of stations and structures during EUS 
procedures. The EUS-IREAD has the potential to play an essential part in EUS 
quality control.
