High-dose saccharin supplementation does not induce gut microbiota changes or glucose intolerance in healthy humans and mice 

1/Background: Non-caloric artificial sweeteners (NCAS) are widely used as a substitute for dietary sugars to control 
body weight or glycemia. Paradoxically, some interventional studies in humans and rodents have shown 
unfavorable changes in glucose homeostasis in response to NCAS consumption. The causative mechanisms are 
largely unknown, but adverse changes in gut microbiota have been proposed to mediate these effects. These 
findings have raised concerns about NCAS safety and called into question their broad use, but further physiological 
and dietary considerations must be first addressed before these results are generalized. We also reasoned that, since 
NCAS are bona fide ligands for sweet taste receptors (STRs) expressed in the intestine, some metabolic effects 
associated with NCAS use could be attributed to a common mechanism involving the host. 

2/3/Results: We conducted a double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel arm study exploring the effects of pure 
saccharin compound on gut microbiota and glucose tolerance in healthy men and women. Participants were 
randomized to placebo, saccharin, lactisole (STR inhibitor), or saccharin with lactisole administered in capsules twice 
daily to achieve the maximum acceptable daily intake for 2 weeks. In parallel, we performed a 10-week study 
administering pure saccharin at a high dose in the drinking water of chow-fed mice with genetic ablation of STRs 
(T1R2-KO) and wild-type (WT) littermate controls. In humans and mice, none of the interventions affected glucose 
or hormonal responses to an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) or glucose absorption in mice. Similarly, pure 
saccharin supplementation did not alter microbial diversity or composition at any taxonomic level in humans and 
mice alike. No treatment effects were also noted in readouts of microbial activity such as fecal metabolites or shortchain 
fatty acids (SCFA). However, compared to WT, T1R2-KO mice were protected from age-dependent increases 
in fecal SCFA and the development of glucose intolerance. 

4/Conclusions: Short-term saccharin consumption at maximum acceptable levels is not sufficient to alter gut 
microbiota or induce glucose intolerance in apparently healthy humans and mice. 