Dupilumab significantly improves sleep in adults with atopic dermatitis: results from the 12-week placebo-controlled period of the 24-week phase IV randomized double-blinded placebo-controlled DUPISTAD study.

1/BACKGROUND: Sleep disturbance is a prominent symptom of atopic dermatitis (AD) and can result in insomnia, daytime fatigue, drowsiness, reduced productivity and impaired quality of life (QoL).
OBJECTIVES: The Dupilumab Effect on Sleep in AD Patients (DUPISTAD) phase IV randomized double-blinded placebo-controlled study evaluated the impact of dupilumab treatment on sleep and other patient- and physician-reported outcomes.

2/METHODS: Adults with moderate-to-severe AD were randomized 2 : 1 to dupilumab 300 mg once every 2 weeks (q2w) or placebo for 12 weeks; concomitant topical corticosteroids were permitted. Patients subsequently entered an open-label phase and received dupilumab 300 mg q2w for a further 12 weeks. The primary endpoint was the percentage change in sleep quality from baseline to week 12, assessed using a novel numeric rating scale (NRS). Secondary and exploratory endpoints included percentage change in peak pruritus NRS (PP NRS), change in 
SCORing Atopic Dermatitis (SCORAD), SCORAD sleep visual analogue scale (VAS), Eczema Area and Severity Index, Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) sleep-related impairment T-score and the Epworth Sleepiness Scale. Sleep diary and wrist actigraphy measurements were recorded throughout the study.

3/RESULTS: In total, 127 patients received dupilumab and 61 patients received placebo. Demographic and baseline disease characteristics were balanced between groups. Sleep quality NRS significantly improved in patients treated with dupilumab by week 12 vs. placebo [least squares mean of the difference (LSMD) -15.5%, P < 0.001]. PP NRS (LSMD -27.9%, P < 0.001), SCORAD (LSMD -15.1, P < 0.001), SCORAD sleep VAS (LSMD -2.1, P < 0.001) and PROMIS T-score (LSMD -3.6, P < 0.001) were also significantly improved at week 12 with dupilumab vs. placebo. The overall percentage of patients reporting treatment-emergent adverse events was lower in the dupilumab group (56.7%) than in the placebo group (67.2%).

4/CONCLUSIONS: Dupilumab significantly improved sleep quality and perception of sleep continuity, itch, metrics of AD severity and QoL in adults with moderate-to-severe AD, with an acceptable safety profile compared with placebo.
