1/ Muscular strength represents a specific component of health-related fitness. 
Hand grip strength is used as a simple and dynamic marker of maximum voluntary 
force of the hand and to estimate overall strength. Today, little is known about 
the relationship between grip strength and health in forcibly displaced 
populations. 
2/ In the present study, we examined whether grip strength is 
associated with various health outcomes in a sample of forcibly displaced people 
living in a Greek refugee camp. The present analyses are part of a larger 
pragmatic randomized controlled trial. In this paper, cross-sectional baseline 
data of 143 participants (71 men, 72 women) will be presented. In addition to 
grip strength, the following physical and mental health outcomes were assessed: 
body weight and body composition, blood pressure, total cholesterol, low- and 
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, triglycerides, blood glucose levels 
(HbA1c), post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms, depressive and anxiety 
symptoms, pain, and quality of life. Linear regression analyses were carried out 
to examine how grip strength is associated with the health outcomes, separately 
for absolute and normalized grip strength scores. 
3/ Grip strength was positively and strongly associated with percentage muscle mass (normalized grip strength: 
Stand. B = 0.58, p < .001), whereas a negative association existed for 
percentage body fat (normalized grip strength: Stand. B = - 0.58, p < .001). No 
statistically significant associations occurred between grip strength and the 
other cardiovascular risk markers. In contrast, we found that participants with 
higher normalized grip strength reported higher levels of PTSD (normalized grip 
strength: Stand. B = 0.36, p < .05) and depressive symptoms (normalized grip 
strength: Stand. B = 0.29, p < .05). No significant association occurred between 
grip strength, anxiety, pain and quality of life. 
4/ Measuring grip strength in forcibly displaced people can be a useful way to assess their overall muscle 
strength. Grip strength tests are easy to implement, and results can be used to 
assess the effects of specific intervention measures. Nevertheless, our results 
question the usefulness of grip strength as a marker of cardiovascular health 
and mental wellbeing in a refugee camp setting.