Dose-tapering trajectories in patients with remitted psychosis undergoing guided 
antipsychotic reduction to reach minimum effective dose.

1/BACKGROUND: Patients with remitted psychosis wish to reduce antipsychotic doses 
yet facing increased risks of relapse. Examining dose-tapering processes may 
provide insights to re-evaluate the risk-to-benefit balance. We aimed to depict 
and subgroup tapering trajectories, and explore factors associated with 
different dose-reduction patterns.

2/METHODS: A 2-year open-label randomized prospective comparative trial from 
August 2017 to September 2022 in Taiwan. Patients with a history of 
schizophrenia-related psychotic disorders under stable medications and symptoms 
were eligible, randomizing a proportion to conduct guided dose reduction. We 
depicted the trajectories of individual patients and named subgroups based on 
dose-tapering patterns. Predictors of baseline characteristics for designated 
subgroups were examined by logistic regression analysis; changes in outcomes 
were compared by paired t-test.

3/RESULTS: Fifty-one patients undergoing guided dose reduction, 18 (35.3%) reduced 
4 steps consecutively (sequential reducers, SR), 14 (27.5%) reduced 1 to 3 steps 
(modest reducers, MR), 3 (5.9%) re-escalated to previous level (alert reducers, 
AR), 7 (13.7%) returned to baseline level (baseline returners, BR), 6 (11.7%) 
relapsed (failed reducers, FR) and 3 (5.9%) withdrew without relapse (early 
exits, EE). Patients with a history of relapse assumed a conservative 
dose-tapering pace; only the SR subgroup exhibited significant improvements in 
functioning and quality of life while failing to identify variables for 
predicting who would become SR or FR.

4/CONCLUSIONS: Guided dose reduction comprises dynamic processes with differences 
between individual trajectories. The proposed naming of dose-tapering 
patterns/subgroups provides a framework depicting patients undergoing 
dose-tapering. Longer-term observation and more flexible tapering approaches are 
anticipated to reveal favorable outcomes.

DOI: 10.1192/j.eurpsy.2023.2440
PMCID: PMC10594210
PMID: 37578111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare none.