BACKGROUND: Germ Defence ( www.germdefence.org ) is an evidence-based 
interactive website that promotes behaviour change for infection control within 
households. To maximise the potential of Germ Defence to effectively reduce the 
spread of COVID-19, the intervention needed to be implemented at scale rapidly.
METHODS: With NHS England approval, we conducted an efficient two-arm (1:1 
ratio) cluster randomised controlled trial (RCT) to examine the effectiveness of 
randomising implementation of Germ Defence via general practitioner (GP) 
practices across England, UK, compared with usual care to disseminate Germ 
Defence to patients. GP practices randomised to the intervention arm (n = 3292) 
were emailed and asked to disseminate Germ Defence to all adult patients via 
mobile phone text, email or social media. Usual care arm GP practices (n = 3287) 
maintained standard management for the 4-month trial period and then asked to 
share Germ Defence with their adult patients. The primary outcome was the rate 
of GP presentations for respiratory tract infections (RTI) per patient. 
Secondary outcomes comprised rates of acute RTIs, confirmed COVID-19 diagnoses 
and suspected COVID-19 diagnoses, COVID-19 symptoms, gastrointestinal infection 
diagnoses, antibiotic usage and hospital admissions. The impact of the 
intervention on outcome rates was assessed using negative binomial regression 
modelling within the OpenSAFELY platform. The uptake of the intervention by GP 
practice and by patients was measured via website analytics.
RESULTS: Germ Defence was used 310,731 times. The average website satisfaction 
score was 7.52 (0-10 not at all to very satisfied, N = 9933). There was no 
evidence of a difference in the rate of RTIs between intervention and control 
practices (rate ratio (RR) 1.01, 95% CI 0.96, 1.06, p = 0.70). This was similar 
to all other eight health outcomes. Patient engagement within intervention arm 
practices ranged from 0 to 48% of a practice list.
CONCLUSIONS: While the RCT did not demonstrate a difference in health outcomes, 
we demonstrated that rapid large-scale implementation of a digital behavioural 
intervention is possible and can be evaluated with a novel efficient prospective 
RCT methodology analysing routinely collected patient data entirely within a 
trusted research environment.