Accumbal-thalamic connectivity and associated glutamate alterations in human cocaine craving: A state-dependent rs-fMRI and 1H-MRS study
1/Craving is a core symptom of cocaine use disorder and a major factor for relapse 
risk. To date, there is no pharmacological therapy to treat this disease or at 
least to alleviate cocaine craving as a core symptom. In animal models, impaired 
prefrontal-striatal signalling leading to altered glutamate release in the 
nucleus accumbens appear to be the prerequisite for cocaine-seeking. Thus, those 
network and metabolic changes may constitute the underlying mechanisms for 
cocaine craving and provide a potential treatment target. In humans, there is 
recent evidence for corresponding glutamatergic alterations in the nucleus 
accumbens, however, the underlying network disturbances that lead to this 
glutamate imbalance remain unknown.
2/ In this state-dependent randomized, 
placebo-controlled, double-blinded, cross-over multimodal study, resting state 
functional magnetic resonance imaging in combination with small-voxel proton 
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (voxel size: 9.4 × 18.8 × 8.4 mm3) was applied 
to assess network-level and associated neurometabolic changes during a 
non-craving and a craving state, induced by a custom-made cocaine-cue film, in 
18 individuals with cocaine use disorder and 23 healthy individuals. 
Additionally, we assessed the potential impact of a short-term challenge of 
N-acetylcysteine, known to normalize disturbed glutamate homeostasis and to 
thereby reduce cocaine-seeking in animal models of addiction, compared to a 
placebo. 
3/We found increased functional connectivity between the nucleus 
accumbens and the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex during the cue-induced craving 
state. However, those changes were not linked to alterations in accumbal 
glutamate levels. Whereas we additionally found increased functional 
connectivity between the nucleus accumbens and a midline part of the thalamus 
during the cue-induced craving state. Furthermore, obsessive thinking about 
cocaine and the actual intensity of cocaine use were predictive of cue-induced 
functional connectivity changes between the nucleus accumbens and the thalamus. 
Finally, the increase in accumbal-thalamic connectivity was also coupled with 
craving-related glutamate rise in the nucleus accumbens. Yet, N-acetylcysteine 
had no impact on craving-related changes in functional connectivity. 
4/Together, these results suggest that connectivity changes within the 
fronto-accumbal-thalamic loop, in conjunction with impaired glutamatergic 
transmission, underlie cocaine craving and related clinical symptoms, 
pinpointing the thalamus as a crucial hub for cocaine craving in humans.

