Effectiveness of the spirometry-based motivational intervention to quit smoking: 
RESET randomised trial.

1/BACKGROUND: The effectiveness of providing feedback on spirometry results for 
smoking cessation remains inconclusive according to the current evidence.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the effectiveness of a motivational intervention based on 
spirometry results in achieving prolonged smoking abstinence (12 months 
post-intervention).
DESIGN AND SETTING: A randomised, controlled, observer-blinded, multicentre 
clinical trial was conducted (from January 2012 to December 2015) in 20 primary 
healthcare centres in the Tarragona province, Spain.

2/METHODS: Participants, active smokers aged 35-70 without known respiratory 
disease, were recruited from primary healthcare centres by family doctors and 
nurses. They were randomly assigned to either the intervention group (IG = 308) 
or the control group (CG = 306). Both groups received brief smoking cessation 
counselling. Additionally, the IG underwent spirometry and received detailed 
information about the results, including lung age. The primary outcome was 
prolonged abstinence, defined as lasting at least 12 months and validated 
through cotinine measurement in urine.

3/RESULTS: The prolonged abstinence rate was 7.8% in the IG, compared to 2.6% in 
the CG (p = 0.004). At 12 months, in the multivariate analysis, the intervention 
was identified as an independent factor for smoking cessation (OR 2.8; 95%CI 1.2 
to 7.7), a trend maintained throughout the follow-up (HR 2.74; 95%CI 1.13 to 
6.62). Moreover, according to the Prochaska and DiClemente model, the 
preparation or action phase to quit was also associated with smoking cessation 
(HR 2.55, 95%CI 1.07 to 6.09).

4/CONCLUSION: A primary care-delivered intervention involving brief counselling 
and detailed spirometry information proves effective in increasing abstinence 
rates among active smokers without known respiratory disease. Additionally, 
smoking cessation is also influenced by the individual's stage of change.
