internet-delivered cognitive behavioural therapy programme to reduce depressive 
symptoms in patients with multiple sclerosis: a multicentre, randomised, 
controlled, phase 3 trial.

1/BACKGROUND: Depression is three to four times more prevalent in patients with 
neurological and inflammatory disorders than in the general population. For 
example, in patients with multiple sclerosis, the 12-month prevalence of major 
depressive disorder is around 25% and it is associated with a lower quality of 
life, faster disease progression, and higher morbidity and mortality. Despite 
its clinical relevance, there are few treatment options for depression 
associated with multiple sclerosis and confirmatory trials are scarce. We aimed 
to evaluate the safety and efficacy of a multiple sclerosis-specific, 
internet-based cognitive behavioural therapy (iCBT) programme for the treatment 
of depressive symptoms associated with the disease.

2/METHODS: This parallel-group, randomised, controlled, phase 3 trial of an iCBT 
programme to reduce depressive symptoms in patients with multiple sclerosis was 
carried out at five academic centres with large outpatient care units in Germany 
and the USA. Patients with a neurologist-confirmed diagnosis of multiple 
sclerosis and depressive symptoms were randomly assigned (1:1:1; automated 
assignment, concealed allocation, no stratification, no blocking) to receive 
treatment as usual plus one of two versions of the iCBT programme Amiria 
(stand-alone or therapist-guided) or to a control condition, in which 
participants received treatment as usual and were offered access to the iCBT 
programme after 6 months. Masking of participants to group assignment between 
active treatment and control was not possible, although raters were masked to 
group assignment. The predefined primary endpoint, which was analysed in the 
intention-to-treat population, was severity of depressive symptoms as measured 
by the Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II) at week 12 after randomisation. 
This trial is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02740361, and is complete.

3/FINDINGS: Between May 3, 2017, and Nov 4, 2020, we screened 485 patients for 
eligibility. 279 participants were enrolled, of whom 101 were allocated to 
receive stand-alone iCBT, 85 to receive guided iCBT, and 93 to the control 
condition. The dropout rate at week 12 was 18% (50 participants). Both versions 
of the iCBT programme significantly reduced depressive symptoms compared with 
the control group (BDI-II between-group mean differences: control vs stand-alone 
iCBT 6·32 points [95% CI 3·37-9·27], p<0·0001, effect size d=0·97 [95% CI 
0·64-1·30]; control vs guided iCBT 5·80 points [2·71-8·88], p<0·0001, effect 
size d=0·96 [0·62-1·30]). Clinically relevant worsening of depressive symptoms 
was observed in three participants in the control group, one in the stand-alone 
iCBT group, and none in the guided iCBT group. No occurrences of suicidality 
were observed during the trial and there were no deaths.

4/INTERPRETATION: This trial provides evidence for the safety and efficacy of a 
multiple sclerosis-specific iCBT tool to reduce depressive symptoms in patients 
with the disease. This remote-access, scalable intervention increases the 
therapeutic options in this patient group and could help to overcome treatment 
barriers.
